CIK: 922224
Company Name: PPL CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-02-27


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview PPL Electric provides electricity delivery service in eastern and central Pennsylvania. Its headquarters are in Allentown, PA. Please refer to "Item 1. Business - Background" for a description of PPL Electric's business. PPL Electric's strategy and principal challenge is to own and operate its electricity delivery business at the most efficient cost while maintaining high quality customer service and reliability in a cost-effective manner. PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is rate-regulated. Accordingly, this business is subject to regulatory risk with respect to costs that may be recovered and investment returns that may be collected through customer rates. In particular, uncertainty driven by potential changes in the regulatory treatment of PPL Electric's PLR obligation after 2009, when its full requirements supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus expire, presents a risk for PPL Electric. The Customer Choice Act requires electricity delivery companies, like PPL Electric, to act as a PLR of electricity supply and provides that electricity supply costs will be recovered by such companies pursuant to regulations to be established by the PUC. As discussed in more detail in Note 15 to the Financial Statements, there are a number of ongoing regulatory and legislative activities that may affect PPL Electric's recovery of supply costs after 2009. In May 2007, the PUC approved PPL Electric's plan to procure default electricity supply in 2007 through 2009 for retail customers who do not choose an alternative competitive supplier in 2010. Pursuant to this plan, PPL Electric has contracted for two-thirds of the 2010 electricity supply it expects to need for residential, small commercial and small industrial customers. In August 2008, the PUC approved a plan proposed by PPL Electric, under which its residential and small commercial customers, beginning in 2008, could begin to pay in advance to smooth the impact of price increases when generation rate caps expire in 2010. Approximately 10% of PPL Electric's customers are participating in the plan. In February 2009, PPL Electric asked the PUC for permission to offer customers a second option for reducing the potential initial impact of higher electricity prices resulting from expiration of the generation rate caps. If approved by the PUC, this option would enable eligible residential and eligible small-business customers to defer payment of any increase greater than 25% in their 2010 electric bills. The 25% will be calculated on an average rate schedule usage basis, and will be based on a comparison of currently estimated 2009 bills to currently estimated 2010 bills. In September 2007, the PUC regulations became effective regarding the obligation of Pennsylvania electric utilities to provide default electricity supply in 2011 and beyond. In August 2008, PPL Electric filed for PUC approval of its post-2010 supply procurement plan under these regulations. In addition to this regulatory activity, in October 2008, the legislature passed and the Pennsylvania Governor signed a bill that, among other things: (i) requires electric utilities to meet specified goals for reduction in use and peak demand; (ii) establishes procedures and standards for the purchase of PLR supply; and (iii) requires utilities to install smart metering technology and offer time-of-use rates. Utilities must file with the PUC by July 1, 2009, for approval of plans to meet the conservation and demand side requirements of the legislation. The Governor recently publicly stated that he expects some form of rate mitigation to be passed by the state legislature. I n addition, in the last legislative session, certain Pennsylvania legislators introduced legislation to extend generation rate caps or otherwise limit cost recovery through rates for Pennsylvania utilities beyond the end of their transition periods, which in PPL Electric's case is December 31, 2009. It is possible that similar legislation could be reintroduced. If such legislation were introduced and ultimately enacted, PPL Electric could experience substantial operating losses, cash flow shortfalls and other adverse financial impacts. In addition to the activities discussed above relating to PPL Electric's PLR obligations, PPL Electric is engaged in three other major regulatory proceedings. First, in April 2008, the FERC granted PPL Electric's request for incentive rate treatment for the Susquehanna-Roseland 500 kV Transmission Line. Those incentives are: (i) a 1.25% increase to the return on equity previously approved for the project, (ii) inclusion of construction work in progress in rate base, and (iii) recovery of all costs if the line is abandoned. In addition, FERC granted PPL Electric a 0.5% increase to the return on equity previously approved for its continuing membership in PJM. Second, in August 2008, PPL Electric requested permission from FERC to replace its stated rates for transmission service with a formula rate. In October 2008, FERC permitted PPL Electric's proposed formula rate to go into effect, subject to refund. The matter is in settlement discussions before an administrative law judge. Third, in January 2009, PPL Electric filed its application with the PUC requesting permission to site and construct the Susquehanna-Roseland line. PUC review is expected to take approximately one year. In order to manage financing costs and access to credit markets, a key objective for PPL Electric is to maintain a strong credit profile. PPL Electric continually focuses on maintaining an appropriate capital structure and liquidity position. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for more information concerning these and other material risks PPL Electric faces in its business. The purpose of "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" is to provide information concerning PPL Electric's past and expected future performance in implementing the strategy and managing the risks and challenges mentioned above. Specifically: "Results of Operations" provides an overview of PPL Electric's operating results in 2008, 2007 and 2006, including a review of earnings. It also provides a brief outlook for 2009. "Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources" provides an analysis of PPL Electric's liquidity position and credit profile, including its sources of cash (including bank credit facilities and sources of operating cash flow) and uses of cash (including contractual obligations and capital expenditure requirements) and the key risks and uncertainties that impact PPL Electric's past and future liquidity position and financial condition. This subsection also includes a listing of PPL Electric's current credit ratings. "Financial Condition - Risk Management" includes an explanation of PPL Electric's risk management activities regarding market risk and credit risk. "Application of Critical Accounting Policies" provides an overview of the accounting policies that are particularly important to the results of operations and financial condition of PPL Electric and that require its management to make significant estimates, assumptions and other judgments. Market Events The continued downturn in the financial markets has increased the complexity of managing credit risk, responding to liquidity needs, measuring financial instruments at fair value, and managing market price risk. Global bank credit capacity has been reduced dramatically and the cost of renewing or establishing new credit facilities has increased significantly. New bank credit facilities generally are being restricted to less than one-year terms, thereby introducing uncertainties as to businesses' ability to enter into long-term energy commitments or reliably estimate the longer-term cost and availability of credit. Credit Risk Credit risk is the risk that PPL Electric would incur a loss as a result of nonperformance by counterparties of their contractual obligations. The continued volatility and downturn in financial and commodity markets during 2008 have generally increased PPL Electric's exposure to credit risk. See Notes 16 and 19 to the Financial Statements for additional information about credit concentration and "Risk Management - Credit Risk" for more information on credit risk. Liquidity Issues The continued downturn in financial markets has generally made obtaining new sources of bank and capital markets funding difficult and costly. During this challenging period, PPL Electric expects to continue to have access to adequate sources of liquidity through operating cash flows, cash and cash equivalents and its credit facilities. PPL Electric plans to issue, subject to market conditions, up to $300 million in long-term debt securities in mid-2009 and does not expect to need to issue any commercial paper during 2009, but may do so from time to time to facilitate short-term cash flow needs if commercial paper market conditions improve. See "Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional information. Securities Price Risk PPL Electric participates in and is allocated costs from defined benefit plans sponsored by PPL. PPL's defined benefit plans experienced negative investment returns in 2008, impacting the funded status of the plans as disclosed in Note 13 to the Financial Statements. Determination of the funded status of defined benefit plans, contribution requirements and net periodic defined benefit costs for future years is subject to changes in several assumptions, including the performance of the assets in the plans. See "Application of Critical Accounting Policies - Defined Benefits" for a discussion of the assumptions and sensitivities regarding those assumptions. The information provided in this Item 7 should be read in conjunction with PPL Electric's Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes. Terms and abbreviations are explained in the glossary. Dollars are in millions unless otherwise noted. Results of Operations Earnings Income available to PPL was: 2008 2007 2006 $ 158 $ 145 $ 180 The after-tax changes in income available to PPL between these periods were due to the following factors. 2008 vs. 2007 2007 vs. 2006 Delivery revenues (net of CTC/ITC amortization, interest expense on transition bonds and ancillary charges) $ 32 $ 15 Other operation and maintenance (8 ) (1 ) Depreciation (8 ) Other Income - net (a) (10 ) Income taxes (6 ) (2 ) Other 4 (3 ) Special items 1 (36 ) $ 13 $ (35 ) (a) Includes interest income from affiliate. The changes in income available to PPL from year to year were, in part, attributable to several special items that management considers significant. Details of these special items are provided below. PPL Electric's year-to-year earnings were affected by: Delivery revenues increased in 2008 compared with 2007, primarily due to a base rate increase effective January 1, 2008 and normal load growth. Delivery revenues increased in 2007 compared with 2006, primarily due to a 4% increase in sales volume resulting primarily from, the impact of favorable weather in 2007 on residential and commercial sales, and normal load growth. Other operation and maintenance expenses increased in 2008 compared with 2007, primarily due to insurance recovery of storm costs in 2007 and higher regulatory asset amortization. Depreciation expense increased in 2007 compared with 2006, primarily due to the purchase of previously leased equipment. Other income - net decreased in 2008 compared with 2007, primarily due to a decrease in interest income from affiliate resulting from a decrease in the average balance outstanding on a note receivable from an affiliate and a lower average rate on this note due to the floating interest rate. The following after-tax amounts, which management considers special items, also had a significant impact on earnings. 2008 2007 2006 Workforce reduction $ $ (1 ) Realization of benefits related to Black Lung Trust assets (Note 13) $ 21 PJM billing dispute (a) 21 Reversal of cost recovery - Hurricane Isabel (Note 1) (7 ) Total $ $ (1 ) $ 35 (a) In 2005, PPL Electric recorded a loss accrual, including interest expense, related to a PJM billing dispute. In 2006, the accrual was reduced and it was determined that PPL Energy Supply was responsible for a portion of the loss accrual, including interest. PPL Electric's earnings beyond 2008 are subject to various risks and uncertainties. See "Forward-Looking Information," "Item 1A. Risk Factors," the rest of this Item 7 and Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and factors that may impact PPL Electric's future earnings. 2009 Outlook Excluding special items and the impact of the cost reduction initiative discussed below, PPL Electric projects slightly lower earnings in 2009 compared with 2008, where slightly higher distribution revenues are expected to be offset by higher operation and maintenance expenses. See Note 26 to the Financial Statements for additional information on a cost reduction initiative completed in February 2009. PPL Electric expects to achieve annual pre-tax savings of between $6 and $8 million from the reduction of management and staff positions, including a reduction of costs allocated as a result of the elimination of positions at PPL Services. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of the PUC-approved plan to procure default electricity supply in 2007 through 2009, additional information on Pennsylvania legislative and other regulatory activities, and a FERC-approved transmission rate, all of which may impact future results of operations. Statement of Income Analysis -- Operating Revenues Retail Electric The increases in revenues from retail electric operations were attributable to: 2008 vs. 2007 2007 vs. 2006 PLR $ 19 $ 109 Delivery 17 43 Other 3 $ 39 $ 152 The increase in PLR revenue for 2008 compared with 2007 was attributable to normal load growth. The increase in delivery revenue for the same period was primarily attributable to a base rate increase effective January 1, 2008, and normal load growth. These increases were partially offset by the unfavorable impact of weather on residential and commercial sales in 2008. The increase in PLR revenue and delivery revenue for 2007 compared with 2006 was primarily due to a 4% increase in sales volume. This increase was primarily due to the impact of favorable weather in 2007 on residential and commercial sales and normal load growth. Wholesale Electric to Affiliate PPL Electric has a contract to sell to PPL EnergyPlus the electricity that PPL Electric purchases under contracts with NUGs. The decrease of $48 million in wholesale electric to affiliate in 2008 compared to 2007 was primarily due to the expiration of a NUG contract at the end of 2007 and the expiration of two NUG contracts during 2008. The decrease was partially offset by higher prices on certain NUG contracts. Substantially all of the remaining NUG contracts will expire by 2010. Energy Purchases Energy purchases decreased by $43 million for 2008 compared with 2007, primarily due to the expiration of a NUG contract at the end of 2007 and two NUG contracts in 2008, partially offset by higher prices on certain NUG contracts. Substantially all of the remaining NUG contracts will expire by 2010. In 2005, PPL Electric recorded a loss accrual related to a PJM billing dispute. In 2006, the accrual was reduced and it was determined that PPL Energy Supply was responsible for a portion of the loss accrual. The $28 million reduction of this loss accrual in 2006 was the primary reason for the $31 million increase in energy purchases for 2007 compared with 2006. Also, $6 million in higher ancillary costs contributed to the increase. Energy Purchases from Affiliate Energy purchases from affiliate increased by $16 million in 2008 compared with 2007. The increase was primarily due to higher prices for energy purchased under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus that support the PLR load, as well as higher PLR load. Energy purchases from affiliate increased by $102 million in 2007 compared with 2006. The increase was primarily due to higher PLR load, as well as higher prices for energy purchased under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus that support the PLR load. Other Operation and Maintenance The changes in other operation and maintenance expense were due to: 2008 vs. 2007 2007 vs. 2006 Insurance recovery of storm costs $ 5 $ (11 ) Regulatory asset amortization 4 Allocation of certain corporate service costs (Note 16) 3 (2 ) Realization of benefits related to Black Lung Trust assets in 2006 (Note 13) 36 Hurricane Isabel (Note 1) (11 ) Distribution system reliability work, including tree trimming (1 ) 6 PUC-reportable storm costs (4 ) 6 Bad debt expense (a) (5 ) 4 Other 6 5 $ 8 $ 33 (a) The decrease in bad debt expense from 2007 to 2008 reflects the impact of a new Universal Service Rider effective January 1, 2008, which provides for recovery of costs associated with universal service programs including uncollectible accounts applicable to certain residential customers. Amortization of Recoverable Transition Costs Amortization of recoverable transition costs decreased by $17 million in 2008 compared with 2007. Amortization of recoverable transition costs increased by $28 million in 2007 compared with 2006. The amortization of recoverable transition costs is based on a PUC amortization schedule, adjusted for ITC and CTC recoveries in customer rates and related expenses. Since the amortization substantially matches the revenue recorded based on recovery in customer rates, there is minimal impact on earnings. Depreciation Depreciation increased by $14 million in 2007 compared with 2006, primarily due to PP&E additions. The increase reflects the impact of the 2006 purchase of equipment previously leased. See Note 11 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Taxes, Other Than Income Taxes, other than income increased by $3 million in 2008 compared with 2007. The increase was primarily due to a $6 million increase in Pennsylvania gross receipts tax expense which reflects an increase in the tax rate in 2008. This tax is passed through to customers. The increase was partially offset by a $1 million decrease in domestic sales and use tax. Taxes, other than income increased by $11 million in 2007 compared with 2006. The increase was primarily due to a $12 million increase in Pennsylvania gross receipts tax expense, which is passed through to customers, resulting from a 4% increase in sales volume. Other Income - net See Note 17 to the Financial Statements for details of other income. Interest Income from Affiliate Interest income from affiliate decreased by $10 million in 2008 compared with 2007. The decrease was the result of a reduced average balance outstanding on a note receivable from an affiliate and a lower average rate on this note due to the floating interest rate. Financing Costs The decreases in financing costs, which include "Interest Expense," "Interest Expense with Affiliate" and "Dividends on Preferred Securities," were due to: 2008 vs. 2007 2007 vs. 2006 Long-term debt interest expense $ 7 $ (1 ) Interest accrued for PJM billing dispute (a) 7 Dividends on 6.25% Series Preference Stock issued in April 2006 (Note 7) 4 Interest on PLR contract collateral (Note 16) (7 ) Repayment of transition bonds (Note 8) (22 ) (21 ) Other (2 ) (1 ) $ (24 ) $ (12 ) (a) In 2005, PPL Electric recorded a loss accrual, including interest expense, related to a PJM billing dispute. In 2006, the accrual was reduced and it was determined that PPL Energy Supply was responsible for a portion of the loss accrual. Income Taxes The changes in income taxes were due to: 2008 vs. 2007 2007 vs. 2006 Higher (lower) pre-tax book income $ 16 $ (23 ) Tax return adjustments (Note 5) 7 (5 ) Tax reserve adjustments (Note 5) (1 ) 5 Other (3 ) 2 $ 19 $ (21 ) See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for details on effective income tax rates. Financial Condition Liquidity and Capital Resources In general, the continued downturn in the financial markets has made obtaining new sources of bank and capital markets funding difficult and costly. During this challenging period, PPL Electric continues to focus on maintaining a strong credit profile and liquidity position. PPL Electric expects to continue to have adequate liquidity available through operating cash flows, cash and cash equivalents and its credit facilities. PPL Electric currently does not expect to need to access commercial paper markets or debt and equity capital markets until mid-2009. PPL Electric's cash flows from operations and access to cost-effective bank and capital markets are subject to risks and uncertainties including, but not limited to: unusual or extreme weather that may damage PPL Electric's transmission and distribution facilities or affect energy sales to customers; the ability to recover and the timeliness and adequacy of recovery of costs associated with regulated utility businesses; any adverse outcome of legal proceedings and investigations with respect to PPL Electric's current and past business activities; continued downturn in the financial markets that could make obtaining new sources of bank and capital markets funding more difficult and more costly; and a downgrade in PPL Electric's credit ratings that could adversely affect its ability to access capital and increase the cost of credit facilities and any new debt. At December 31, PPL Electric had the following: 2008 2007 2006 Cash and cash equivalents $ 483 $ 33 $ 150 Short-term investments 26 $ 483 $ 33 $ 176 Short-term debt $ 95 $ 41 $ 42 The changes in PPL Electric's cash and cash equivalents position resulted from: 2008 2007 2006 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 648 $ 568 $ 578 Net Cash Used in Investing Activities (226 ) (239 ) (287 ) Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities 28 (446 ) (439 ) Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents $ 450 $ (117 ) $ (148 ) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by 14%, or $80 million, in 2008 compared with 2007, primarily as a result of increased revenues, which was due primarily to a base rate increase effective January 1, 2008 and normal load growth, as well as less interest incurred on long-term debt, as a result of the repayment of transition bonds during 2007 and 2008. The increases to cash provided by operating activities resulting from these items were partially offset by increased energy purchases, primarily as a result of higher prices for energy purchased from PPL EnergyPlus under the PLR contracts and higher PLR load, as well as an insurance recovery of storm costs in 2007. While PPL Electric's net cash provided by operating activities was relatively unchanged from 2006 to 2007, there were some significant changes in the components of its net cash provided by operating activities. In 2007, delivery revenues increased primarily as a result of an increase in sales volumes in 2007 compared with 2006, which was due to the impact of favorable weather in 2007 on residential and commercial sales and normal load growth. This increase in revenues was offset by an increase in energy purchases, primarily from PPL EnergyPlus under the PLR contracts to support the PLR load. An important element supporting the stability of PPL Electric's cash from operations is its purchase contracts with PPL EnergyPlus. These contracts provide sufficient energy for PPL Electric to meet its PLR obligation through 2009, at the predetermined capped rates it is entitled to charge its customers over this period. These contracts require cash collateral or other credit enhancement, or reductions or terminations of a portion of the entire contract through cash settlement, in the event of adverse changes in market prices. Also under the contracts, PPL Energy Supply may request cash collateral or other credit enhancement, or reductions or terminations of a portion of the entire contract through cash settlement, in the event of a downgrade of PPL Electric's credit ratings. The maximum amount that PPL Electric would have to post under these contracts is $300 million, and PPL Electric estimates that it would not have had to post any collateral if energy prices decreased by 10% from year-end 2008 or 2007 levels. As discussed in the "Overview," pursuant to a plan approved by the PUC, PPL Electric has entered into contracts to procure two-thirds of the 2010 electricity supply it expects to need for residential, small commercial and small industrial customers. Absent any legislation being passed to extend generation rate caps or otherwise limit cost recovery through rates for Pennsylvania utilities beyond the end of their transition periods, PPL Electric would expect its cash from operations to remain relatively stable in 2010. Investing Activities The primary use of cash in investing activities is capital expenditures. See "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for detail regarding capital expenditures in 2008 and projected expenditures for the years 2009 through 2013. Net cash used in investing activities remained relatively stable in 2008 compared with 2007, but there were significant changes in certain components. In 2008, there was a net decrease of $69 million in restricted cash and cash equivalents compared to a net increase of $8 million in 2007. Capital expenditures decreased $18 million in 2008 compared with 2007. In 2008, PPL Electric loaned $23 million to an affiliate compared with receiving $23 million in 2007 from an affiliate as partial repayment of a demand loan. Additionally, PPL Electric received net proceeds of $25 million from purchases and sales of investments in 2007 compared with none in 2008. Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $48 million in 2007 compared with 2006, primarily as a result of $25 million in net proceeds from purchases and sales of investments and $23 million received from an affiliate as a partial repayment on a demand loan that was extended to the affiliate in 2004. Financing Activities Net cash provided by financing activities was $28 million in 2008 compared with net cash used in financing activities of $446 million in 2007. The change from 2007 to 2008 primarily reflects increased issuances and less retirements of long-term debt, less common stock dividends to PPL and increased short-term borrowings in 2008. PPL Electric had net debt issuances of $148 million in 2008 compared to net debt retirements of $306 million in 2007, and it paid $21 million less of common stock dividends to PPL in 2008 compared to 2007. Although net cash used in financing activities remained stable in 2007 compared with 2006, there were significant changes in certain components. PPL Electric had net debt retirements of $306 million in 2007 compared with $433 million in 2006. Additionally, in 2006, PPL Electric received net proceeds of $245 million from the issuance of preference stock, received a $75 million contribution from PPL and repurchased $200 million of common stock from PPL. A portion of the proceeds received from the issuance of the preference stock was used to fund the repurchase of common stock from PPL in 2006. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for information regarding the preference stock issued by PPL Electric. See "Forecasted Sources of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to issue debt and equity securities, as well as a discussion of credit facility capacity available to PPL Electric. Also see "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to pay dividends on its common and preferred securities, as well as maturities of PPL Electric's long-term debt. PPL Electric's debt financing activity in 2008 was: Issuances (a) Retirements PPL Electric Senior Secured Bonds $ 399 PPL Electric Tax-Exempt Refunding 90 $ (90 ) PPL Transition Bond Company Transition Bonds (305 ) PPL Electric short-term debt (net change) 54 Total $ 543 $ (395 ) Net increase $ 148 (a) Amounts are net of pricing discounts, where applicable. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for more detailed information regarding PPL Electric's financing activities in 2008. Forecasted Sources of Cash PPL Electric expects to continue to have significant sources of cash available in the near term, including various credit facilities and a commercial paper program. PPL Electric currently does not expect to need to access commercial paper markets or debt and equity capital markets until mid-2009, but may decide to access capital markets at an earlier date, subject to market conditions. Credit Facilities At December 31, 2008, PPL Electric's total committed borrowing capacity under its credit facilities and the use of this borrowing capacity were: Committed Capacity Borrowed Letters of Credit Issued (d) Unused Capacity 5-year Syndicated Credit Facility (a) $ 190 $ 95 $ 1 $ 94 Asset-backed Credit Facility (b) 150 150 Total PPL Electric Credit Facilities (c) $ 340 $ 95 $ 1 $ 244 (a) The committed capacity under PPL Electric's syndicated credit facility decreased by approximately $10 million in December 2008 as a result of the termination of the commitment of a participating lender. The commitments under this credit facility are currently provided by a diverse bank group consisting of 20 banks, with no one bank providing more than 18% of the total committed capacity. Borrowings under this credit facility generally bear interest at LIBOR-based rates plus a spread, depending upon the company's public debt rating. PPL Electric also has the capability to cause the lenders to issue up to $190 million of letters of credit under this facility, which issuances reduce available borrowing capacity. Under certain conditions, PPL Electric may request that the facility's capacity be increased by up to $100 million. This credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring debt to total capitalization to not exceed 70%. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, PPL Electric's consolidated debt to total capitalization percentages, as calculated in accordance with its credit facility, were 53% and 47%. This credit facility also contains standard representations and warranties that must be made for PPL Electric to borrow under it. (b) This credit facility relates to an asset-backed commercial paper program through which PPL Electric obtains financing by selling and contributing its eligible accounts receivable and unbilled revenues to a special purpose, wholly-owned subsidiary on an ongoing basis. The subsidiary pledges these assets to secure loans of up to an aggregate of $150 million from a commercial paper conduit sponsored by a financial institution. At December 31, 2008, based on accounts receivable and unbilled revenue pledged, $101 million was available for borrowing. (c) The committed capacity expires as follows: $150 million in 2009 and $190 million in 2012. PPL Electric intends to renew its existing $150 million asset-backed credit facility in 2009 in order to maintain its current total committed capacity level. (d) PPL Electric has a reimbursement obligation to the extent any letters of credit are drawn upon. In addition to the financial covenant noted in the table above, the credit agreements governing the credit facilities contain various other covenants. Failure to comply with the covenants after applicable grace periods could result in acceleration of repayment of borrowings and/or termination of the agreements. PPL Electric monitors compliance with the covenants on a regular basis. At December 31, 2008, PPL Electric was in material compliance with these covenants. At this time, PPL Electric believes that these covenants and other borrowing conditions will not limit access to these funding sources. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of PPL Electric's credit facilities. Commercial Paper PPL Electric maintains a commercial paper program for up to $200 million to provide an additional financing source to fund its short-term liquidity needs, if and when necessary. Commercial paper issuances are supported by PPL Electric's five-year syndicated credit facility based on available capacity. PPL Electric had no commercial paper outstanding at December 31, 2008. As noted below under "Credit Ratings," commercial paper for PPL Electric is rated P-2, A-2 and F2 by Moody's, S&P and Fitch. Liquidity in the markets for commercial paper with these ratings became extremely limited during the second half of 2008 as a result of the downturn in the financial markets. Liquidity for commercial paper with these ratings has improved thus far in 2009, but it is still somewhat difficult and costly for PPL Electric to issue commercial paper. Based on its current cash position and anticipated cash flows, PPL Electric currently does not expect to need to issue any commercial paper during 2009, but it may do so from time to time to facilitate short-term cash flow needs if market conditions improve. Contributions from PPL From time to time PPL may make capital contributions to PPL Electric. PPL Electric may use these contributions for general corporate purposes. Long-Term Debt and Equity Securities Subject to market conditions in 2009, PPL Electric plans to issue up to $300 million in long-term debt securities in mid-2009. PPL Electric prefunded a portion of its 2009 financing needs through the issuance of $400 million of Senior Secured Bonds in October 2008, which will partially fund an approximately $486 million bond maturity in August 2009. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of the prefunding of PPL Electric's 2009 debt maturity. PPL expects to use the proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt securities primarily to fund capital expenditures, to partially fund the August 2009 debt maturity and for general corporate purposes. PPL Electric currently does not plan to issue any equity securities in 2009. Forecasted Uses of Cash In addition to expenditures required for normal operating activities, such as purchased power, payroll, and taxes, PPL Electric currently expects to incur future cash outflows for capital expenditures, various contractual obligations and payment of dividends on its common and preferred securities. Capital Expenditures The table below shows PPL Electric's actual spending for the year 2008 and current capital expenditure projections for the years 2009 through 2013. Actual Projected 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Construction expenditures (a) (b) Transmission and distribution facilities $ 237 $ 267 $ 553 $ 630 $ 483 $ 516 Other 38 22 29 19 21 19 Total Capital Expenditures $ 275 $ 289 $ 582 $ 649 $ 504 $ 535 (a) Construction expenditures include AFUDC, which is expected to be approximately $80 million for the years 2009 through 2013. (b) Includes expenditures for intangible assets. PPL Electric's capital expenditure projections for the years 2009 through 2013 total approximately $2.6 billion. Capital expenditure plans are revised periodically to reflect changes in operational, market and regulatory conditions. In light of current economic conditions, which have contributed to slower system-wide load growth and deferral of customer growth expansion plans, certain projects previously included in this table have been cancelled or completion dates have been delayed. The table includes projected costs for the PJM-approved regional transmission line expansion project. See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for additional information. PPL Electric plans to fund its capital expenditures in 2009 with cash on hand, cash from operations and proceeds from the issuance of debt securities. Contractual Obligations PPL Electric has assumed various financial obligations and commitments in the ordinary course of conducting its business. At December 31, 2008, the estimated contractual cash obligations of PPL Electric were: Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 4-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term Debt (a) $ 1,769 $ 486 $ 500 $ 783 Interest on Long-term Debt (b) 1,067 108 $ 148 143 668 Purchase Obligations (c) 3,712 1,953 1,752 5 2 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on the Balance Sheets under GAAP (d) Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 6,548 $ 2,547 $ 1,900 $ 648 $ 1,453 (a) Reflects principal maturities only based on legal maturity. See Statements of Long-Term Debt for a discussion of variable-rate remarketable bonds issued by the PEDFA on behalf of PPL Electric. PPL Electric does not have any capital or operating lease obligations. (b) Assumes interest payments through maturity. The payments herein are subject to change, as payments for variable-rate debt have been estimated. (c) The payments reflected herein are subject to change, as the purchase obligation reflected is an estimate based on projected obligated quantities and projected pricing under the contract. Purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the amounts presented. (d) At December 31, 2008, total unrecognized tax benefits of $77 million were excluded from this table as PPL Electric cannot reasonably estimate the amount and period of future payments. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Dividends From time to time, as determined by its Board of Directors, PPL Electric pays dividends on its common stock to its parent, PPL. As discussed in Note 8 to the Financial Statements, PPL Electric may not pay dividends on its common stock, except in certain circumstances, unless full dividends have been paid on the 6.25% Series Preference Stock for the then-current dividend period. Additionally, PPL Electric's 2001 Senior Secured Bond Indenture restricts dividend payments on its common stock in the event that PPL Electric fails to meet an interest coverage ratio or fails to comply with certain requirements included in its Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws to maintain its separateness from PPL and PPL's other subsidiaries. PPL Electric does not, at this time, expect that any of such limitations would significantly impact its ability to declare dividends. PPL Electric expects to continue to pay quarterly dividends on its outstanding preferred securities, if and as declared by its Board of Directors. Credit Ratings Moody's, S&P and Fitch periodically review the credit ratings on the debt and preferred securities of PPL Electric. Based on their respective independent reviews, the rating agencies may make certain ratings revisions or ratings affirmations. A credit rating reflects an assessment by the rating agency of the creditworthiness associated with an issuer and particular securities that it issues. The credit ratings of PPL Electric are based on information provided by PPL Electric and other sources. The ratings of Moody's, S&P and Fitch are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any securities of PPL Electric. Such ratings may be subject to revisions or withdrawal by the agencies at any time and should be evaluated independently of each other and any other rating that may be assigned to the securities. A downgrade in PPL Electric's credit ratings could result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to capital markets. The following table summarizes the credit ratings of PPL Electric at December 31, 2008. Moody's S&P Fitch (a) PPL Electric (b) Senior Unsecured/Issuer Rating Baa1 A- BBB First Mortgage Bonds A3 A- A- Senior Secured Bonds A3 A- A- Commercial Paper P-2 A-2 F2 Preferred Stock Baa3 BBB BBB Preference Stock Baa3 BBB BBB Outlook STABLE STABLE STABLE (a) Issuer Rating for Fitch is an "Issuer Default Rating." (b) Excludes Pollution Control Revenue Bonds issued by the LCIDA and the PEDFA on behalf of PPL Electric, of which the LCIDA bonds are insured and may be rated on the basis of relevant factors, including the insurer's ratings. Moody's and S&P did not take any actions related to PPL Electric during 2008. In March 2008, Fitch completed a review of its credit ratings for PPL Electric and affirmed all the ratings for PPL Electric, with the exception that it lowered the preferred stock rating to BBB from BBB+. Fitch stated in the related press release that the lower preferred stock rating reflects its junior position in the capital structure and does not reflect any change in credit quality. In January 2009, S&P completed a review of PPL Electric, upon which it revised its outlook to negative from stable and affirmed the A- issuer rating of PPL Electric. S&P stated in its press release that the revision in its outlook reflects the linkage with PPL, whose outlook was also revised to negative from stable, along with their expectation that PPL Electric's financial metrics could weaken beginning in 2010. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements PPL Electric has entered into certain guarantee agreements that are within the scope of FIN 45. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of guarantees. Risk Management Market Risk Commodity Price Risk - PLR Contracts through 2009 PPL Electric and PPL EnergyPlus have power supply agreements under which PPL EnergyPlus sells to PPL Electric (under a predetermined pricing arrangement) energy and capacity to fulfill PPL Electric's PLR obligation through 2009. As a result, PPL Electric has shifted any electric price risk relating to its PLR obligation to PPL EnergyPlus through 2009. See Note 16 to the Financial Statements for information regarding credit risk associated with the PLR contracts with PPL EnergyPlus. Commodity Price Risk - PLR Contracts Subsequent to 2009 In order to mitigate the risk that PPL Electric will not be able to obtain adequate energy supply subsequent to 2009, when the full requirements of energy supply agreements with PPL EnergyPlus expire, PPL Electric has entered into power purchase agreements that include fixed prices. PPL Electric's future financial performance will be affected by its ability to enter into other new supply contracts, the duration and pricing of such contracts relative to prevailing market conditions, the regulatory treatment for such contracts and the associated recovery of its supply costs. Depending on these factors, PPL Electric's financial results may be materially adversely affected. See "Overview" for information on the PUC-approved procurement plan and other ongoing Pennsylvania regulatory and legislative activities. Interest Rate Risk PPL Electric has issued debt to finance its operations, which exposes it to interest rate risk. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, PPL Electric's potential annual exposure to increased interest expense, based on a 10% increase in interest rates, was not significant. PPL Electric estimated that a 10% decrease in interest rates at December 31, 2008 would increase the fair value of its debt portfolio by $50 million, compared with $49 million at December 31, 2007. Defined Benefit Plans - Securities Price Risk See "Application of Critical Accounting Policies - Defined Benefits" for additional information regarding the effect of securities price risk on plan assets. Credit R isk Credit risk is the risk that PPL Electric would incur a loss as a result of nonperformance by counterparties of their contractual obligations. PPL Electric requires that counterparties maintain specified credit ratings and requires other assurances in the form of credit support or collateral in certain circumstances in order to limit counterparty credit risk. However, PPL Electric has concentrations of suppliers, financial institutions and customers. These concentrations may impact PPL Electric's overall exposure to credit risk, positively or negatively, as counterparties may be similarly affected by changes in economic, regulatory or other conditions. In 2007, the PUC approved PPL Electric's post-rate cap plan to procure default electricity supply for retail customers who do not choose an alternative competitive supplier in 2010. PPL Electric's plan provides for the procurement of the necessary electricity supply for 2010 through a series of six competitive bid solicitation processes during 2007 through 2009. As of December 31, 2008, PPL Electric has contracted for two-thirds of the expected 2010 electricity supply requirements for its residential, small commercial and small industrial customers. Under the standard Supply Master Agreement (the Agreement) for the bid solicitation process, PPL Electric requires all suppliers to post collateral if their credit exposure exceeds an established credit limit. In the event a supplier defaults on its obligation, PPL Electric would be required to seek replacement power in the market. All incremental costs incurred by PPL Electric would be recoverable from customers in future rates. At December 31, 2008, all of the successful bidders had an investment grade credit rating from S&P, and were not required to post collateral under the Agreement. There is no instance under the Agreement in which PPL Electric is required to post collateral to its suppliers. See "Overview" above and Notes 15, 16 and 19 to the Financial Statements for additional information on the competitive solicitations, the Agreement and credit concentration. Related Party Transactions PPL Electric is not aware of any material ownership interests or operating responsibility by senior management of PPL Electric in outside partnerships, including leasing transactions with variable interest entities, or other entities doing business with PPL Electric. For additional information on related party transactions, see Note 16 to the Financial Statements. Environmental Matters See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of environmental matters. Competition See "Item 1. Business - Competition" and "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for a discussion of competitive factors affecting PPL Electric. New Accounting Standards See Note 1 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of new accounting standards adopted and Note 25 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of new accounting standards pending adoption. Application of Critical Accounting Policies PPL Electric's financial condition and results of operations are impacted by the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. The following accounting policies are particularly important to the financial condition or results of operations of PPL Electric, and require estimates or other judgments of matters inherently uncertain. Changes in the estimates or other judgments included within these accounting policies could result in a significant change to the information presented in the Financial Statements (these accounting policies are also discussed in Note 1 to the Financial Statements). PPL's senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and the estimates and assumptions regarding them with its Audit Committee. In addition, PPL's senior management has reviewed the following disclosures regarding the application of these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee. SFAS 157 In 2006, the FASB issued SFAS 157, which provides a definition of fair value as well as a framework for measuring fair value. In February 2008, the FASB amended SFAS 157, as originally issued, through the issuance of FSP FAS 157-1 and FSP FAS 157-2. FSP FAS 157-1 amends SFAS 157 to exclude from its scope certain accounting pronouncements that address fair value measurements associated with leases. FSP FAS 157-2 was effective upon issuance and delays the effective date of SFAS 157 to fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2008, for nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities that are not recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually). In October 2008, the FASB further amended SFAS 157 through the issuance of FSP FAS 157-3, which was effective upon issuance and amends SFAS 157 to clarify its application in a market that is not active. As permitted by this guidance, PPL Electric partially applied SFAS 157, prospectively, effective January 1, 2008. PPL Electric adopted FSP FAS 157-3, prospectively, effective July 1, 2008. The partial application of SFAS 157 affected fair value measurement concepts used or embedded in PPL Electric's critical accounting policy related to "Defined Benefits." See Notes 1 and 18 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding SFAS 157. 1) Defined Benefits PPL Electric participates in and is allocated a significant portion of the liability and net periodic defined benefit pension and other postretirement costs of plans sponsored by PPL Services based on participation in those plans. PPL follows the guidance of SFAS 87 and SFAS 106 when accounting for these defined benefits. In addition, PPL adopted the recognition and measurement date provisions of SFAS 158 effective December 31, 2006. Subsequent to the adoption of SFAS 158, PPL is required to record an asset or liability to recognize the funded status of all defined benefit plans with an offsetting entry to regulatory assets for the portion allocated to PPL Electric. Consequently, the funded status of all defined benefit plans is now fully recognized on the Balance Sheets and PPL no longer recognizes additional minimum liability adjustments in OCI. See Note 13 to the Financial Statements for additional information about the plans and the accounting for defined benefits. Under these accounting standards, assumptions are made regarding the valuation of benefit obligations and performance of plan assets. Delayed recognition in earnings of differences between actual results and expected or estimated results is a guiding principle of these standards. Annual net periodic defined benefit costs are recorded in current earnings based on these estimated results. Any differences between actual and estimated results are recorded as regulatory assets. The regulatory assets are amortized to income over future periods. This delayed recognition in income of actual results allows for a smoothed recognition of costs over the working lives of the employees who benefit under the plans. The primary assumptions are: Discount Rate - The discount rate is used in calculating the present value of benefits, which are based on projections of benefit payments to be made in the future. The objective in selecting the discount rate is to measure the single amount that, if invested at the measurement date in a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments, would provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the accumulated benefits when due. Expected Return on Plan Assets - Management projects the future return on plan assets considering prior performance, but primarily based upon the plans' mix of assets and expectations for the long-term returns on those asset classes. These projected returns reduce the net benefit costs PPL Electric records currently. Rate of Compensation Increase - Management projects employees' annual pay increases, which are used to project employees' pension benefits at retirement. Health Care Cost Trend Rate - Management projects the expected increases in the cost of health care. In selecting a discount rate for its domestic defined benefit plans, PPL starts with an analysis of the expected benefit payment stream for its plans. This information is first matched against a spot-rate yield curve. A portfolio of over 300 Aa-graded non-callable (or callable with make-whole provisions) bonds, with a total amount outstanding in excess of $275 billion, serves as the base from which those with the lowest and highest yields are eliminated to develop the ultimate yield curve. The results of this analysis are considered together with other economic data and movements in various bond indices to determine the discount rate assumption. At December 31, 2008, PPL increased the discount rate for its domestic pension plans from 6.39% to 6.50% as a result of this assessment and increased the discount rate for its other postretirement benefit plans from 6.26% to 6.45%. In selecting an expected return on plan assets, PPL considers tax implications, past performance and economic forecasts for the types of investments held by the plans. At December 31, 2008, PPL's expected return on plan assets was reduced from 8.25% to 8.0% for its domestic pension plans and decreased from 7.80% to 7.0% for its other postretirement benefit plans. In selecting a rate of compensation increase, PPL considers past experience in light of movements in inflation rates. At December 31, 2008, PPL's rate of compensation increase remained at 4.75% for its domestic plans. In selecting health care cost trend rates, PPL considers past performance and forecasts of health care costs. At December 31, 2008, PPL's health care cost trend rates were 8.40% for 2009, gradually declining to 5.50% for 2014. A variance in the assumptions listed above could have a significant impact on the accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and the regulatory assets allocated to PPL Electric. The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the 2008 financial statements associated with a change in certain assumptions based on PPL's primary defined benefit plans. While the charts below reflect either an increase or decrease in each assumption, the inverse of this change would impact the accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and regulatory assets by a similar amount in the opposite direction. The sensitivities below reflect an evaluation of the change based solely on a change in that assumption and does not include income tax effects. At December 31, 2008, PPL Electric had recorded the following defined benefit plan liabilities: Pension liabilities $ 209 Other postretirement benefit liabilities 69 The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the December 31, 2008 Balance Sheet associated with a change in certain assumptions based on PPL's primary defined benefit plans. Increase (Decrease) Actuarial assumption Change in assumption Impact on defined benefit liabilities Impact on regulatory assets Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 28 $ 28 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 5 5 Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1.0% 4 4 (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. In 2008, PPL Electric was allocated net periodic defined benefit costs charged to operating expense of $18 million. This amount represents a $1 million increase compared with the charge recognized during 2007. The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the 2008 Statement of Income (excluding income tax effects) associated with a change in certain assumptions based on PPL's primary defined benefit plans. Actuarial assumption Change in assumption Impact on defined benefit costs Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 3 Expected Return on Plan Assets (0.25)% 2 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 1 Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1.0% 1 (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. 2) Loss Accruals PPL Electric periodically accrues losses for the estimated impacts of various conditions, situations or circumstances involving uncertain outcomes. PPL Electric's accounting for such events is prescribed by SFAS 5 and other related accounting guidance. SFAS 5 defines a contingency as "an existing condition, situation, or set of circumstances involving uncertainty as to possible gain or loss to an enterprise that will ultimately be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur." For loss contingencies, the loss must be accrued if (1) information is available that indicates it is "probable" that the loss has been incurred, given the likelihood of the uncertain future events, and (2) the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. The FASB defines "probable" as cases in which "the future event or events are likely to occur." PPL Electric does not record the accrual of contingencies that might result in gains, unless recovery is assured. PPL Electric continuously assesses potential loss contingencies for environmental remediation, litigation claims, regulatory penalties and other events. The accounting aspects of estimated loss accruals include (1) the initial identification and recording of the loss, (2) the determination of triggering events for reducing a recorded loss accrual, and (3) the ongoing assessment as to whether a recorded loss accrual is sufficient. All three of these aspects of accounting for loss accruals require significant judgment by PPL Electric's management. PPL Electric uses its internal expertise and outside experts (such as lawyers and engineers), as necessary, to help estimate the probability that a loss has been incurred and the amount (or range) of the loss. No significant loss accruals were initially recorded in 2008. PPL Electric has identified certain other events that could give rise to a loss, but that do not meet the conditions for accrual under SFAS 5. SFAS 5 requires disclosure, but not a recording, of potential losses when it is "reasonably possible" that a loss has been incurred. The FASB defines "reasonably possible" as cases in which "the chance of the future event or events occurring is more than remote but less than likely." See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for disclosure of other potential loss contingencies that have not met the criteria for accrual under SFAS 5. When an estimated loss is accrued, PPL Electric identifies, where applicable, the triggering events for subsequently reducing the loss accrual. The triggering events generally occur when the contingency has been resolved and the actual loss is incurred, or when the risk of loss has diminished or been eliminated. The following are some of the triggering events that provide for the reduction of certain recorded loss accruals: Allowances for uncollectible accounts are reduced when accounts are written off after prescribed collection procedures have been exhausted, a better estimate of the allowance is determined or underlying amounts are ultimately collected. Environmental and other litigation contingencies are reduced when the contingency is resolved and PPL Electric makes actual payments, a better estimate of the loss is determined or the loss is no longer considered probable. PPL Electric reviews its loss accruals on a regular basis to assure that the recorded potential loss exposures are appropriate. This involves ongoing communication and analyses with internal and external legal counsel, engineers, operation management and other parties. 3) Income Tax Uncertainties Significant management judgment is required in developing PPL Electric's provision for income taxes primarily due to the uncertainty related to tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns and the determination of deferred tax assets, liabilities and valuation allowances. PPL Electric and its subsidiaries adopted FIN 48 effective January 1, 2007. The adoption of FIN 48 altered the methodology PPL Electric previously used to account for income tax uncertainties. Effective with the adoption of FIN 48, uncertain tax positions are no longer considered to be contingencies assessed in accordance with SFAS 5. Similar to SFAS 5, FIN 48 requires significant management judgment to determine the amount of benefit to be recognized in relation to an uncertain tax position. FIN 48 requires PPL Electric to evaluate its tax positions following a two-step process. The first step requires an entity to determine whether, based on the technical merits supporting a particular tax position, it is more likely than not (greater than a 50% chance) that the tax position will be sustained. This determination assumes that the relevant taxing authority will examine the tax position and is aware of all the relevant facts surrounding the tax position. The second step requires an entity to recognize the benefit of a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition criterion in the financial statements. The benefit is measured at the largest amount of benefit that has a likelihood of realization, upon settlement, that exceeds 50%. PPL Electric's management considers a number of factors in assessing the benefit to be recognized, including negotiation of a settlement. On a quarterly basis, PPL Electric reassesses its uncertain tax positions by considering information known at the reporting date. Based on management's assessment of new information, PPL Electric may subsequently recognize a tax benefit for a previously unrecognized tax position, de-recognize a previously recognized tax position, or re-measure the benefit of a previously recognized tax position. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of issues raised by taxing authorities may differ materially from the amounts accrued and may materially impact PPL Electric's financial statements in the future. The balance sheet classification of unrecognized tax benefits and the need for valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets also require significant management judgment. FIN 48 requires an entity to classify unrecognized tax benefits as current, to the extent management expects to settle an uncertain tax position, by payment or receipt of cash, within one year of the reporting date. Valuation allowances are initially recorded and reevaluated each reporting period by assessing the likelihood of the ultimate realization of a deferred tax asset. Management considers a number of factors in assessing the realization of a deferred tax asset, including the reversal of temporary differences, future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Any tax planning strategy utilized in this assessment must meet the recognition and measurement criteria of FIN 48. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for the disclosures required by FIN 48. At December 31, 2008, it was reasonably possible that during the next 12 months the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits could decrease by up to $9 million for PPL Electric. This decrease could result from the timing and/or valuation of certain deductions, intercompany transactions and unitary filing groups. The events that could cause these changes are direct settlements with taxing authorities, litigation, legal or administrative guidance by relevant taxing authorities and the lapse of an applicable statute of limitation. 4) Regulation PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is cost-based rate-regulated. As a result, PPL Electric accounts for this business in accordance with the provisions of SFAS 71, which requires cost-based rate-regulated entities to reflect the effects of regulatory actions in their financial statements. PPL Electric records assets and liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that may not be recorded under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such costs are probable of future recovery in regulated customer rates. Regulatory liabilities generally represent obligations to regulated customers for previous collections of costs that have not yet been incurred but are expected to be incurred in the future. These amounts are recorded to income only when the associated costs are incurred. Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as changes in the applicable regulatory and political environments, the ability to recover costs through regulated rates, recent rate orders to other regulated entities, and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. Based on this continual assessment, management believes the existing regulatory assets are probable of recovery. This assessment reflects the current political and regulatory climate at the state and federal levels, and is subject to change in the future. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, then asset write-offs would be required to be recognized in operating income. Additionally, the regulatory agencies can provide flexibility in the manner and timing of the depreciation of PP&E and amortization of regulatory assets. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, PPL Electric had regulatory assets of $737 million and $837 million. All of PPL Electric's regulatory assets are either currently being recovered under specific rate orders or represent amounts that will be recovered in future rates based upon established regulatory practices. Other Information PPL's Audit Committee has approved the independent auditor to provide audit and audit-related services and other services permitted by Sarbanes-Oxley and SEC rules. The audit and audit-related services include services in connection with statutory and regulatory filings, reviews of offering documents and registration statements, and internal control reviews . 
