CIK: 922224
Company Name: PPL CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2013-02-28


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The information provided in this Item 7 should be read in conjunction with KU's Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes. Capitalized terms and abbreviations are defined in the glossary. Dollars are in millions, unless otherwise noted. "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" includes the following information: "Overview" provides a description of KU and its business strategy, a summary of Net Income and a discussion of certain events related to KU's results of operations and financial condition. "Results of Operations" provides a summary of KU's earnings and a description of key factors expected to impact future earnings. This section ends with explanations of significant changes in principal items on KU's Statements of Income, comparing 2012 with 2011 and 2011 with 2010. "Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources" provides an analysis of KU's liquidity position and credit profile. This section also includes a discussion of forecasted sources and uses of cash and rating agency actions. "Financial Condition - Risk Management" provides an explanation of KU's risk management programs relating to market and credit risk. "Application of Critical Accounting Policies" provides an overview of the accounting policies that are particularly important to the results of operations and financial condition of KU and that require its management to make significant estimates, assumptions and other judgments of matters inherently uncertain. Overview Introduction KU, headquartered in Lexington, Kentucky, is a regulated utility engaged in the generation, transmission, distribution and sale of electric energy in Kentucky, Virginia and Tennessee. KU and its affiliate, LG&E, are wholly owned subsidiaries of LKE. LKE, a holding company, became a wholly owned subsidiary of PPL when PPL acquired all of LKE's interests from E.ON US Investments Corp. on November 1, 2010. Following the acquisition, both KU and LG&E continue operating as subsidiaries of LKE, which is now an intermediary holding company in PPL's group of companies. Refer to "Item 1. Business - Background" for a description of KU's business. Business Strategy KU's overall strategy is to provide reliable, safe, competitively priced energy to its customers and reasonable returns on regulated investments to its shareowner. A key objective for KU is to maintain a strong credit profile through managing financing costs and access to credit markets. KU continually focuses on maintaining an appropriate capital structure and liquidity position. Successor and Predecessor Financial Presentation KU's Financial Statements and related financial and operating data include the periods before and after PPL's acquisition of LKE on November 1, 2010 and have been segregated to present pre-acquisition activity as the Predecessor and post-acquisition activity as the Successor. Certain accounting and presentation methods were changed to acceptable alternatives to conform to PPL's accounting policies, and the cost bases of certain assets and liabilities were changed as of November 1, 2010 as a result of the application of push-down accounting. Consequently, the financial position, results of operations and cash flows for the Successor periods are not comparable to the Predecessor periods; however, the core operations of KU have not changed as a result of the acquisition. 175 Financial and Operational Developments Net Income Net Income for 2012, 2011 and 2010 was $137 million, $178 million and $175 million. Earnings in 2012 decreased 23% from 2011 and earnings in 2011 increased 2% from 2010. See "Results of Operations" for a discussion and analysis of KU's earnings. Rate Case Proceedings In June 2012, KU filed a request with the KPSC for an increase in annual base electric rates of approximately $82 million. In November 2012, KU along with all of the parties filed a unanimous settlement agreement. Among other things, the settlement provided for increases in annual base electric rates of $51 million. The settlement agreement also included revised depreciation rates that result in reduced annual depreciation expense of approximately $10 million. The settlement agreement included an authorized return on equity of 10.25%. On December 20, 2012, the KPSC issued an order approving the provisions in the settlement agreement. The new rates became effective on January 1, 2013. Equity Method Investment KU owns 20% of the common stock of EEI. Through a power marketer affiliated with its majority owner, EEI sells its output to third parties. KU's investment in EEI is accounted for under the equity method of accounting. KU's direct exposure to loss as a result of its involvement with EEI is generally limited to the value of its investment. During the fourth quarter of 2012, KU concluded that an other-than-temporary decline in the value of its investment in EEI had occurred. Accordingly, KU recorded a $15 million impairment charge, net of taxes, related to this investment as of December 31, 2012, bringing the investment balance to zero. The impairment charge is shown in the line "Other-Than-Temporary Impairments" on the Statement of Income for the year ended December 31, 2012. Commercial Paper In February 2012, KU established a commercial paper program for up to $250 million to provide an additional financing source to fund its short-term liquidity needs, if and when necessary. Commercial paper issuances are supported by KU's Syndicated Credit Facility. At December 31, 2012, KU had $70 million of commercial paper outstanding. Terminated Bluegrass CTs Acquisition In September 2011, KU and LG&E entered into an asset purchase agreement with Bluegrass Generation for the purchase of the Bluegrass CTs, aggregating approximately 495 MW, plus limited associated contractual arrangements required for operation of the units, for a purchase price of $110 million, pending receipt of applicable regulatory approvals. In May 2012, the KPSC issued an order approving the request to purchase the Bluegrass CTs. In November 2011, KU and LG&E filed an application with the FERC under the Federal Power Act requesting approval to purchase the Bluegrass CTs. In May 2012, the FERC issued an order conditionally authorizing the acquisition of the Bluegrass CTs, subject to approval by the FERC of satisfactory mitigation measures to address market-power concerns. After a review of potentially available mitigation options, KU and LG&E determined that the options were not commercially justifiable. In June 2012, KU and LG&E terminated the asset purchase agreement for the Bluegrass CTs in accordance with its terms and made applicable filings with the KPSC and FERC. Cane Run Unit 7 Construction In September 2011, KU and LG&E filed a CPCN with the KPSC requesting approval to build Cane Run Unit 7. In May 2012, the KPSC issued an order approving the request. KU will own a 78% undivided interest and LG&E will own a 22% undivided interest in the new generating unit. A formal request for recovery of the costs associated with the construction was not included in the CPCN filing with the KPSC but is expected to be included in future rate case proceedings. KU and LG&E commenced preliminary construction activities in the third quarter of 2012 and project construction is expected to be completed by May 2015. The project, which includes building a natural gas supply pipeline and related transmission projects, has an estimated cost of approximately $600 million. In conjunction with this construction and to meet new, more stringent EPA regulations with a 2015 compliance date, KU anticipates retiring two older coal-fired electric generating units at the Green River plant, which have a combined summer capacity rating of 163 MW. In addition, KU retired the remaining 71 MW unit at the Tyrone plant in February 2013. 176 Future Capacity Needs In addition to the construction of a combined cycle gas unit at the Cane Run station, KU and LG&E continue to assess future capacity needs. As a part of the assessment, KU and LG&E issued an RFP in September 2012 for up to 700 MW of capacity beginning as early as 2015. Results of Operations As previously noted, KU's results for the periods after October 31, 2010 are on a basis of accounting different from its results for periods prior to November 1, 2010. See "Overview - Successor and Predecessor Financial Presentation" for further information. The utility business is affected by seasonal weather. As a result, operating revenues (and associated operating expenses) are not generated evenly throughout the year. Revenue and earnings are generally higher during the first and third quarters and lower during the second and fourth quarters due to weather. The following table summarizes the significant components of net income for 2012, 2011 and 2010 and the changes therein: Earnings Successor Predecessor Two Months Ten Months Year Ended Year Ended Ended Ended December 31, December 31, December 31, October 31, 2012 2011 2010 2010 Net Income $ 137 $ 178 $ 35 $ 140 The changes in the components of Net Income between these periods were due to the following factors, which reflect reclassifications for items included in Margins and certain items that management considers special. 2012 vs. 2011 2011 vs. 2010 Margins $ (10) $ 52 Other operation and maintenance (16) (12) Depreciation (6) (28) Taxes, other than income (4) (9) Other Income (Expense) - net (7) (2) Interest Expense 1 8 Income Taxes 16 (6) Special items, after-tax (15) Total $ (41) $ 3 As a result of low energy prices and environmental regulations, KU assessed the recoverability of its equity method investment in EEI. KU determined it was impaired, and recorded a $15 million impairment charge, net of taxes, as of December 31, 2012. This impairment is considered a special item by management. See "Statement of Income Analysis - Margins - Changes in Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for an explanation of Margins. Higher other operation and maintenance in 2012 compared with 2011 primarily due to $8 million of higher coal plant maintenance costs related to an increased scope of scheduled outages and a $6 million credit to establish a regulatory asset recorded when approved in 2011 related to 2009 storm costs. Higher other operation and maintenance in 2011 compared with 2010 primarily due to $19 million of higher coal plant maintenance costs related to an increased scope of scheduled outages and higher variable costs from increased generation due to TC2 commencing dispatch in January 2011. This increase was partially offset by a $6 million credit to establish a regulatory asset recorded when approved in 2011 related to 2009 storm costs. Higher depreciation in 2011 compared with 2010 primarily due to TC2 commencing dispatch in January 2011. 177 Lower interest expense in 2011 compared with 2010 primarily due to $18 million less expense primarily related to lower interest rates on the first mortgage bonds issued in November 2010 compared with the rates on the loans from E.ON AG affiliates in place through October 2010. This decrease was partially offset by $8 million of higher expense resulting from higher long-term debt balances. Lower income taxes in 2012 compared with 2011 primarily due to lower pre-tax income. 2013 Outlook Excluding special items, KU projects higher earnings in 2013 compared with 2012, primarily driven by electric base rate increases effective January 1, 2013, returns on additional environmental capital investments and retail load growth, partially offset by higher operation and maintenance. Earnings in future periods are subject to various risks and uncertainties. See "Forward-Looking Information," "Item 1. Business," "Item 1A. Risk Factors," the rest of this Item 7 and Notes 6 and 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and factors that may impact future earnings. Statement of Income Analysis -- Margins Non-GAAP Financial Measure The following discussion includes financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP, as well as a non-GAAP financial measure, "Margins." Margins is not intended to replace "Operating Income," which is determined in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of overall operating performance. Other companies may use different measures to analyze and to report on the results of their operations. Margins is a single financial performance measure of KU's electricity generation, transmission and distribution operations. In calculating this measure, fuel and energy purchases are deducted from revenues. In addition, utility revenues and expenses associated with approved cost recovery mechanisms are offset. These mechanisms allow for recovery of certain expenses, returns on capital investments primarily associated with environmental regulations and performance incentives. Certain costs associated with these mechanisms, primarily ECR and DSM, are recorded as "Other operation and maintenance" and "Depreciation." As a result, this measure represents the net revenues from KU's operations. This performance measure is used, in conjunction with other information, internally by senior management to manage operations and analyze actual results compared with budget. Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures The following tables reconcile "Operating Income" to "Margins" as defined by KU for 2012, 2011 and 2010. 2012 Successor 2011 Successor Operating Operating Margins Other (a) Income (b) Margins Other (a) Income (b) Operating Revenues $ 1,524 $ 1,524 $ 1,548 $ 1,548 Operating Expenses Fuel 498 498 516 516 Energy purchases 109 109 112 112 Other operation and maintenance 55 $ 329 384 49 $ 313 362 Depreciation 49 144 193 48 138 186 Taxes, other than income 23 23 19 19 Total Operating Expenses 711 496 1,207 725 470 1,195 Total $ 813 $ (496) $ 317 $ 823 $ (470) $ 353 178 Successor Predecessor Two Months Ended December 31, 2010 Ten Months Ended October 31, 2010 Operating Operating Margins Other (a) Income (b) Margins Other (a) Income (b) Operating Revenues $ 263 $ 263 $ 1,248 $ 1,248 Operating Expenses Fuel 78 78 417 417 Energy purchases 28 28 147 147 Other operation and maintenance 6 $ 59 65 29 $ 242 271 Depreciation 6 20 26 29 90 119 Taxes, other than income 1 1 9 9 Total Operating Expenses 118 80 198 622 341 963 Total $ 145 $ (80) $ 65 $ 626 $ (341) $ 285 (a) Represents amounts excluded from Margins. (b) As reported on the Statements of Income. Changes in Non-GAAP Financial Measures Margins decreased by $10 million for 2012 compared with 2011, primarily due to $10 million of lower retail margins, as volumes were impacted by unseasonably mild weather during the first four months of 2012. Total heating degree days decreased 9% compared to 2011, partially offset by a 4% increase in cooling degree days. Margins increased by $52 million for 2011 compared with 2010. New KPSC rates went into effect on August 1, 2010, contributing to an additional $64 million in operating revenue over the prior year. Partially offsetting the rate increase were lower retail volumes resulting from weather and economic conditions. Other Operation and Maintenance The increase (decrease) in other operation and maintenance was due to: 2012 vs. 2011 2011 vs. 2010 Coal plant maintenance (a) $ 17 $ 9 Distribution maintenance (b) 8 Administrative and general (c) (5) 7 Fuel for generation (d) 6 Steam operation (e) 10 Other generation maintenance (2) Other 2 (4) Total $ 22 $ 26 (a) Coal plant maintenance costs increased in 2012 compared with 2011 primarily due to $8 million of expenses related to an increased scope of scheduled outages, as well as $5 million of increased maintenance on the scrubber system and primary fuel combustion system at the Ghent plant. Coal plant maintenance costs increased in 2011 compared with 2010 primarily due to $8 million of expenses related to an increased scope of scheduled outages. (b) Distribution maintenance increased in 2012 compared with 2011 primarily due to a $6 million credit to establish a regulatory asset recorded when approved in 2011 related to 2009 storm costs. (c) Administrative and general costs decreased in 2012 compared with 2011 primarily due to a decrease in pension expense resulting from pension funding and lower interest cost. Administrative and general costs increased in 2011 compared with 2010 due to higher outside services costs of $2 million, higher labor costs of $1 million and higher pension costs of $1 million. (d) Fuel handling costs are included in other operation and maintenance on the Statements of Income for the Successor periods and are in fuel on the Statement of Income for the Predecessor period. (e) Steam operation costs increased in 2011 compared with 2010 due to increased generation as a result of TC2 commencing dispatch in 2011. 179 Depreciation The increase (decrease) in depreciation was due to: 2012 vs. 2011 2011 vs. 2010 TC2 (dispatch began in January 2011) $ 25 E.W. Brown sulfur dioxide scrubber equipment (placed in-service in June 2010) 8 Other additions to PP&E $ 7 8 Total $ 7 $ 41 Taxes, Other Than Income Taxes, other than income increased by $9 million in 2011 compared with 2010, primarily due to a $5 million state coal tax credit that was applied to 2010 property taxes. The remaining increase was due to higher assessments, primarily from significant property additions. Other Income (Expense) - net Other income (expense) - net decreased by $7 million in 2012 compared with 2011 primarily due to $8 million losses from the EEI investment recorded in 2012. Other-Than-Temporary Impairments Other-than-temporary impairments increased by $25 million in 2012 compared with 2011 due to the $25 million pre-tax impairment of the EEI investment. See Notes 1 and 18 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Interest Expense Interest expense decreased by $8 million in 2011 compared with 2010, primarily due to $18 million less expense primarily related to lower interest rates on the first mortgage bonds issued in November 2010 compared with the rates on the loans from E.ON AG affiliates in place through October 2010. This decrease was partially offset by $8 million of higher expense resulting from higher long-term debt balances. Income Taxes Income taxes decreased by $26 million in 2012 compared with 2011, primarily due to the decrease in pre-tax income. Income taxes increased by $6 million in 2011 compared with 2010, primarily due to the increase in pre-tax income. Financial Condition Liquidity and Capital Resources KU expects to continue to have adequate liquidity available through operating cash flows, cash and cash equivalents, its credit facilities and commercial paper issuances. Additionally, subject to market conditions, KU currently plans to access capital markets in 2013. KU's cash flows from operations and access to cost-effective bank and capital markets are subject to risks and uncertainties including, but not limited to: changes in commodity prices that may increase the cost of producing or purchasing power or decrease the amount KU receives from selling power; operational and credit risks associated with selling and marketing products in the wholesale power markets; unusual or extreme weather that may damage KU's transmission and distribution facilities or affect energy sales to customers; reliance on transmission facilities that KU does not own or control to deliver its electricity; unavailability of generating units (due to unscheduled or longer-than-anticipated generation outages, weather and natural disasters) and the resulting loss of revenues and additional costs of replacement electricity; the ability to recover and the timeliness and adequacy of recovery of costs associated with regulated utility businesses; costs of compliance with existing and new environmental laws; 180 any adverse outcome of legal proceedings and investigations with respect to KU's current and past business activities; deterioration in the financial markets that could make obtaining new sources of bank and capital markets funding more difficult and more costly; and a downgrade in KU's credit ratings that could adversely affect its ability to access capital and increase the cost of credit facilities and any new debt. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for further discussion of risks and uncertainties affecting KU's cash flows. At December 31, KU had the following: 2012 2011 2010 Cash and cash equivalents $ 21 $ 31 $ 3 Short-term debt (a) $ 70 (a) Represents borrowings made under KU's commercial paper program. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for additional information. The changes in KU's cash and cash equivalents position resulted from: Successor Predecessor Two Months Ten Months Year Ended Year Ended Ended Ended December 31, December 31, December 31, October 31, 2012 2011 2010 2010 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 500 $ 444 $ 30 $ 344 Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities (480) (279) (89) (340) Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities (30) (137) 58 (2) Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents $ (10) $ 28 $ (1) $ 2 Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by 13%, or $56 million, in 2012 compared with 2011, primarily as a result of: Other operating cash flows increased by $45 million driven by a $29 million reduction in pension funding. Working capital cash flows increased by $11 million driven by lower income tax payments as a result of lower taxable income in 2012, offset by changes in receivables and unbilled revenues due to milder December weather in 2011 than in 2012 and 2010. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by 19%, or $70 million, in 2011 compared with 2010, primarily as a result of: an increase in net income adjusted for non-cash effects of $115 million (deferred income taxes and investment tax credits of $81 million and depreciation of $41 million, partially offset by defined benefit plans - expense of $2 million and other noncash items of $19 million); a net decrease in working capital related to unbilled revenues of $21 million due to colder weather in December 2010 as compared with December 2009, and milder weather in December 2011 as compared with December 2010; partially offset by an increase in discretionary defined benefit plan contributions of $30 million made in order to achieve KU's long-term funding requirements; the timing of ECR collections of $28 million; and an increase in cash outflows related to accrued taxes of $28 million due to an accrual in excess of payments made in 2010 for the 2010 tax year and the payment of the 2010 tax liability in 2011, along with payments made in 2011 over the accrual for the 2011 tax year. 181 Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by 72%, or $201 million, in 2012 compared with 2011, as a result of an increase in capital expenditures of $201 million, primarily due to coal combustion residuals projects at Ghent and E.W. Brown, construction of Cane Run Unit 7 and Ghent environmental air projects. See "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for detail regarding projected capital expenditures for the years 2013 through 2017. Net cash used in investing activities decreased by 35%, or $150 million, in 2011 compared with 2010, as a result of a decrease in capital expenditures of $150 million primarily due to the completion of KU's scrubber program in 2010 and TC2 being dispatched in 2011. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities was $30 million in 2012 compared with net cash provided by financing activities of $137 million in 2011, primarily as a result of less long-term debt issuances and higher dividends to LKE. In 2012, cash used in financing activities consisted of: the payment of common stock dividends to LKE of $100 million; partially offset by the issuance of short-term debt in the form of commercial paper $70 million. Net cash used in financing activities was $137 million in 2011 compared with net cash provided by financing activities of $56 million in 2010, primarily as a result of less long-term debt issuances and higher dividends to LKE. In 2011, cash used in financing activities consisted of: the payment of common stock dividends to LKE of $124 million; a net decrease in notes payable with affiliates of $10 million; and the payment of debt issuance and credit facility costs of $3 million. In the two months of 2010 following the acquisition, cash provided by financing activities of the Successor consisted of: the issuance of first mortgage bonds of $1,489 million after discounts; and the issuance of debt of $1,331 million to a PPL affiliate to repay debt due to an E.ON AG affiliate upon the closing of PPL's acquisition of LKE; partially offset by the repayment of debt to an E.ON AG affiliate of $1,331 million upon the closing of PPL's acquisition of LKE; the repayment of debt to a PPL affiliate of $1,331 million upon the issuance of first mortgage bonds; a net decrease in notes payable with affiliates of $83 million; and the payment of debt issuance and credit facility costs of $17 million. In the ten months of 2010 preceding PPL's acquisition of LKE, cash used in financing activities by the Predecessor consisted of: the payment of common stock dividends to LKE of $50 million; partially offset by a net increase in notes payable with affiliates of $48 million. See "Forecasted Sources of Cash" for a discussion of KU's plans to issue debt securities, as well as a discussion of credit facility capacity available to KU. Also see "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for a discussion of plans to pay dividends on common securities in the future, as well as maturities of long-term debt. KU had no long-term debt securities activity during the year. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for additional information about long-term debt securities. 182 Auction Rate Securities At December 31, 2012, KU's tax-exempt revenue bonds that are in the form of auction rate securities and total $96 million continue to experience failed auctions. Therefore, the interest rate continues to be set by a formula pursuant to the relevant indentures. For the period ended December 31, 2012, the weighted-average rate on KU's auction rate bonds in total was 0.25%. Forecasted Sources of Cash KU expects to continue to have sufficient sources of cash available in the near term, including various credit facilities, its commercial paper program, issuance of debt securities and operating cash flow. Credit Facilities At December 31, 2012, KU's total committed borrowing capacity under its credit facilities and the use of this borrowing capacity were: Commercial Letters of Unused Capacity Paper Issued Credit Issued Capacity Syndicated Credit Facility (a) (d) $ 400 $ 70 $ 330 Letter of Credit Facility (b) (d) 198 $ 198 Total Credit Facilities (c) $ 598 $ 70 $ 198 $ 330 (a) In November 2012, KU amended its Syndicated Credit Facility to extend the expiration date to November 2017. (b) In August 2012, the KU letter of credit facility agreement was amended and restated to allow for certain payments under the letter of credit facility to be converted to loans rather than requiring immediate payment. (c) The commitments under KU's credit facilities are provided by a diverse bank group, with no one bank and its affiliates providing an aggregate commitment of more than 19% of the total committed capacity available to KU. (d) KU pays customary fees under its syndicated credit facility as well as its letter of credit facility, and borrowings generally bear interest at LIBOR-based rates plus an applicable margin. KU participates in an intercompany money pool agreement whereby LKE and/or LG&E make available to KU funds up to $500 million at an interest rate based on a market index of commercial paper issues. At December 31, 2012 there was no balance outstanding. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of KU's credit facilities. Operating Leases KU also has available funding sources that are provided through operating leases. KU leases office space and certain equipment. These leasing structures provide KU additional operating and financing flexibility. The operating leases contain covenants that are typical for these agreements, such as maintaining insurance, maintaining corporate existence and timely payment of rent and other fees. See Note 11 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of the operating leases. Capital Contributions from LKE From time to time LKE may make capital contributions to KU. KU may use these contributions to fund capital expenditures and for other general corporate purposes. Long-term Debt Securities KU currently plans to issue, subject to market conditions, up to $300 million of first mortgage bond indebtedness in 2013, the proceeds of which will be used to fund capital expenditures and for other general corporate purposes. Forecasted Uses of Cash In addition to expenditures required for normal operating activities, such as purchased power, payroll, fuel and taxes, KU currently expects to incur future cash outflows for capital expenditures, various contractual obligations, payment of dividends on its common stock and possibly the purchase or redemption of a portion of debt securities. 183 Capital Expenditures The table below shows KU's current capital expenditure projections for the years 2013 through 2017. Projected 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Capital expenditures (a) Generating facilities $ 289 $ 140 $ 136 $ 251 $ 308 Distribution facilities 89 87 97 92 107 Transmission facilities 48 37 40 40 61 Environmental 331 386 264 106 65 Other 27 24 25 27 22 Total Capital Expenditures $ 784 $ 674 $ 562 $ 516 $ 563 (a) KU generally expects to recover these costs over a period equivalent to the related depreciable lives of the assets through rates. The 2013 total excludes amounts included in accounts payable as of December 31, 2012. KU's capital expenditure projections for the years 2013 through 2017 total approximately $3.1 billion. Capital expenditure plans are revised periodically to reflect changes in operational, market and regulatory conditions. This table includes current estimates for KU's environmental projects related to existing and proposed EPA compliance standards. Actual costs may be significantly lower or higher depending on the final requirements and market conditions. Environmental compliance costs incurred by KU in serving KPSC jurisdictional customers are generally eligible for recovery through the ECR mechanism. KU plans to fund its capital expenditures in 2013 with cash on hand, cash from operations, short-term debt and issuance of debt securities. Contractual Obligations KU has assumed various financial obligations and commitments in the ordinary course of conducting its business. At December 31, 2012, the estimated contractual cash obligations of KU were: Total 2013 2014 - 2015 2016 - 2017 After 2017 Long-term Debt (a) $ 1,851 $ 250 $ 1,601 Interest on Long-term Debt (b) 1,481 $ 64 130 $ 126 1,161 Operating Leases (c) 51 9 15 9 18 Coal and Natural Gas Purchase Obligations (d) 1,046 411 479 156 - Unconditional Power Purchase Obligations (e) 319 9 18 20 272 Construction Obligations (f) 1,023 455 366 202 Pension Benefit Plan Obligations (g) 59 59 Other Obligations (h) 21 5 9 6 1 Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 5,851 $ 1,012 $ 1,267 $ 519 $ 3,053 (a) Reflects principal maturities only based on stated maturity dates. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of variable-rate remarketable bonds issued on behalf of KU. KU has no capital lease obligations. (b) Assumes interest payments through stated maturity. The payments herein are subject to change, as payments for debt that is or becomes variable-rate debt have been estimated. (c) See Note 11 to the Financial Statements for additional information. (d) Represents contracts to purchase coal, natural gas and natural gas transportation. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information. (e) Represents future minimum payments under OVEC power purchase agreements through June 2040. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information. (f) Represents construction commitments, including commitments for the Ghent environmental air projects, Cane Run Unit 7 and Ghent landfill which are also reflected in the Capital Expenditures table presented above. (g) Based on the current funded status of LKE's qualified pension plan, which covers KU employees, no cash contributions are required. See Note 13 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of expected contributions. (h) Represents other contractual obligations. Dividends From time to time, as determined by its Board of Directors, KU pays dividends to its sole shareholder, LKE. As discussed in Note 7 to the Financial Statements, KU's ability to pay dividends is limited under a covenant in its $400 million revolving line of credit facility. This covenant restricts the debt to total capital ratio to not more than 70%. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for other restrictions related to distributions on capital interests for KU. 184 Purchase or Redemption of Debt Securities KU will continue to evaluate purchasing or redeeming outstanding debt securities and may decide to take action depending upon prevailing market conditions and available cash. Rating Agency Actions Moody's, S&P and Fitch periodically review the credit ratings on the debt securities of KU. Based on their respective independent reviews, the rating agencies may make certain ratings revisions or ratings affirmations. A credit rating reflects an assessment by the rating agency of the creditworthiness associated with an issuer and particular securities that it issues. The credit ratings of KU are based on information provided by KU and other sources. The ratings of Moody's, S&P and Fitch are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any securities of KU. Such ratings may be subject to revisions or withdrawal by the agencies at any time and should be evaluated independently of each other and any other rating that may be assigned to the securities. The credit ratings of KU affect its liquidity, access to capital markets and cost of borrowing under its credit facilities. The following table sets forth KU's security credit ratings as of December 31, 2012. Senior Unsecured Senior Secured Commercial Paper Issuer Moody's S&P Fitch Moody's S&P Fitch Moody's S&P Fitch Kentucky Utilities A A2 A- A+ P-2 A-2 F-2 In addition to the credit ratings noted above, the rating agencies took the following actions related to KU: In February 2012, Fitch assigned ratings to KU's newly established commercial paper program. In March 2012, Moody's affirmed the following ratings: the long-term ratings of the First Mortgage Bonds for KU; the issuer ratings for KU; and the bank loan ratings for KU. Also in March 2012, Moody's and S&P each assigned short-term ratings to KU's newly established commercial paper program. In December 2012, Fitch affirmed the issuer default ratings, individual security ratings and outlook for KU. Ratings Triggers KU has various derivative and non-derivative contracts, including contracts for the sale and purchase of electricity, fuel, and commodity transportation and storage, which contain provisions requiring KU to post additional collateral, or permitting the counterparty to terminate the contract, if KU's credit rating were to fall below investment grade. See Note 19 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of "Credit Risk-Related Contingent Features," including a discussion of the potential additional collateral that would have been required for derivative contracts in a net liability position at December 31, 2012. At December 31, 2012, if KU's credit ratings had been below investment grade, the maximum amount that KU would have been required to post as additional collateral to counterparties was $21 million for both derivative and non-derivative commodity and commodity-related contracts used in its generation and marketing operations. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements KU has entered into certain agreements that may contingently require payment to a guaranteed or indemnified party. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of these agreements. Risk Management Market Risk See Notes 1, 18 and 19 to the Financial Statements for information about KU's risk management objectives, valuation techniques and accounting designations. 185 The forward-looking information presented below provides estimates of what may occur in the future, assuming certain adverse market conditions and model assumptions. Actual future results may differ materially from those presented. These disclosures are not precise indicators of expected future losses, but only indicators of possible losses under normal market conditions at a given confidence level. Commodity Price Risk (Non-trading) KU's rates are set by regulatory commissions and the fuel costs incurred are directly recoverable from customers. As a result, KU is subject to commodity price risk for only a small portion of on-going business operations. KU sells excess economic generation to maximize the value of the physical assets at times when the assets are not required to serve KU's or LG&E's customers. See Note 19 to the Financial Statements for additional disclosures. The balance and change in net fair value of KU's commodity derivative contracts for the periods ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 were not significant. Interest Rate Risk KU issues debt to finance its operations, which exposes it to interest rate risk. KU utilizes various financial derivative instruments to adjust the mix of fixed and floating interest rates in its debt portfolio when appropriate. Risk limits under KU's risk management program are designed to balance risk, exposure to volatility in interest expense and changes in the fair value of KU's debt portfolio due to changes in the absolute level of interest rates. At December 31, 2012 and 2011, KU's potential annual exposure to increased interest expense, based on a 10% increase in interest rates, was not significant. KU is also exposed to changes in the fair value of its debt portfolio. KU estimated that a 10% decrease in interest rates at December 31, 2012, would increase the fair value of its debt portfolio by $67 million compared with $72 million at December 31, 2011. At December 31, 2012, KU had the following interest rate hedges outstanding: Effect of a Fair Value, 10% Adverse Exposure Net - Asset Movement Hedged (Liability) in Rates Cash flow hedges Interest rate swaps (a) $ 150 $ 7 $ (9) (a) KU utilizes various risk management instruments to reduce its exposure to the expected future cash flow variability of its debt instruments. These risks include exposure to adverse interest rate movements for outstanding variable rate debt and for future anticipated financing. While KU is exposed to changes in the fair value of these instruments, any realized changes in the fair value of such cash flow hedges are recoverable through regulated rates and any subsequent changes in fair value of these derivatives are included in regulatory assets or liabilities. Sensitivities represent a 10% adverse movement in interest rates. The positions outstanding at December 31, 2012 mature through 2043. Credit Risk KU is exposed to potential losses as a result of nonperformance by counterparties of their contractual obligations. KU maintains credit policies and procedures to limit counterparty credit risk including evaluating credit ratings and financial information along with having certain counterparties post margin if the credit exposure exceeds certain thresholds. KU is exposed to potential losses as a result of nonpayment by customers. KU maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts based on a historical charge-off percentage for retail customers. Allowances for doubtful accounts from wholesale and municipal customers and miscellaneous receivables are based on specific identification by management. Retail, wholesale and municipal customer accounts are written-off after four months of no payment activity. Miscellaneous receivables are written-off as management determines them to be uncollectible. Certain of KU's derivative instruments contain provisions that require it to provide immediate and on-going collateralization of derivative instruments in net liability positions based upon KU's credit ratings from each of the major credit rating agencies. See Notes 18 and 19 to the Financial Statements for information regarding exposure and the risk management activities. 186 Related Party Transactions KU is not aware of any material ownership interest or operating responsibility by senior management in outside partnerships, including leasing transactions with variable interest entities or other entities doing business with KU. See Note 16 to the Financial Statements for additional information on related party transactions. Environmental Matters Protection of the environment is a major priority for KU and a significant element of its business activities. Extensive federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations are applicable to KU's air emissions, water discharges and the management of hazardous and solid waste, among other areas, and the costs of compliance or alleged non-compliance cannot be predicted with certainty but could be material. In addition, costs may increase significantly if the requirements or scope of environmental laws or regulations, or similar rules, are expanded or changed from prior versions by the relevant agencies. Costs may take the form of increased capital expenditures or operating and maintenance expenses; monetary fines, penalties or forfeitures or other restrictions. Many of these environmental law considerations are also applicable to the operations of key suppliers, or customers, such as coal producers, industrial power users, etc.; and may impact the costs for their products or their demand for KU's services. Physical effects associated with climate change could include the impact of changes in weather patterns, such as storm frequency and intensity, and the resultant potential damage to KU's generation assets and electricity transmission and distribution systems, as well as impacts on customers. In addition, changed weather patterns could potentially reduce annual rainfall in areas where KU has hydro generating facilities or where river water is used to cool its fossil powered generators. KU cannot currently predict whether its businesses will experience these potential climate change-related risks or estimate the potential cost of their related consequences. See "Item 1. Business - Environmental Matters" and Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of environmental matters. New Accounting Guidance See Notes 1 and 24 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of new accounting guidance adopted and pending adoption. Application of Critical Accounting Policies Financial condition and results of operations are impacted by the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. The following accounting policies are particularly important to the financial condition or results of operations, and require estimates or other judgments of matters inherently uncertain. Changes in the estimates or other judgments included within these accounting policies could result in a significant change to the information presented in the Financial Statements (these accounting policies are also discussed in Note 1 to the Financial Statements). KU's senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies, the following disclosures regarding their application and the estimates and assumptions regarding them, with PPL's Audit Committee. Revenue Recognition - Unbilled Revenue Revenues related to the sale of energy are recorded when service is rendered or when energy is delivered to customers. Because customers of KU's retail operations are billed on cycles which vary based on the timing of the actual reading of their electric meters, KU records estimates for unbilled revenues at the end of each reporting period. Such unbilled revenue amounts reflect estimates of the amount of electricity delivered to customers since the date of the last reading of their meters. The unbilled revenues reflect consideration of estimated usage by customer class, the effect of different rate schedules, changes in weather, and where applicable, the impact of weather normalization or other regulatory provisions of rate structures. In addition to the unbilled revenue accrual resulting from cycle billing, KU makes additional accruals resulting from the timing of customer bills. The accrual of unbilled revenues in this manner properly matches revenues and related costs. At December 31, 2012 and 2011, KU had unbilled revenue balances of $84 million and $81 million. 187 Defined Benefits KU participates in a qualified funded defined benefit pension plan and a funded other postretirement benefit plan. These plans are applicable to the majority of the employees of KU and are sponsored by LKE. LKE allocates a portion of the liability and net periodic defined benefit pension and other postretirement costs of the plans to KU based on its participation. KU records an asset or liability to recognize the funded status of all defined benefit plans with an offsetting entry to regulatory assets or liabilities. Consequently, the funded status of all defined benefit plans is fully recognized on the Balance Sheets. See Note 13 to the Financial Statements for additional information about the plans and the accounting for defined benefits. Certain assumptions are made by LKE regarding the valuation of benefit obligations and the performance of plan assets. When accounting for defined benefits, delayed recognition in earnings of differences between actual results and expected or estimated results is a guiding principle. Annual net periodic defined benefit costs are recorded in current earnings based on estimated results. Any differences between actual and estimated results are recorded in regulatory assets and liabilities for amounts that are expected to be recovered through regulated customer rates. These amounts in regulatory assets and liabilities are amortized to income over future periods. The delayed recognition allows for a smoothed recognition of costs over the working lives of the employees who benefit under the plans. The primary assumptions are: Discount Rate - The discount rate is used in calculating the present value of benefits, which is based on projections of benefit payments to be made in the future. The objective in selecting the discount rate is to measure the single amount that, if invested at the measurement date in a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments, would provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the accumulated benefits when due. Expected Long-term Return on Plan Assets - Management projects the long-term rates of return on plan assets based on historical performance, future expectations and periodic portfolio rebalancing among the diversified asset classes. These projected returns reduce the net benefit costs KU records currently. Rate of Compensation Increase - Management projects employees' annual pay increases, which are used to project employees' pension benefits at retirement. Health Care Cost Trend Rate - Management projects the expected increases in the cost of health care. In selecting a discount rate for its defined benefit plans, LKE starts with a cash flow analysis of the expected benefit payment stream for its plans. The plan-specific cash flows are matched against the coupons and expected maturity values of individually selected bonds. This bond matching process begins with the full universe of Aa-rated non-callable (or callable with make-whole provisions) bonds, serving as the base from which those with the lowest and highest yields are eliminated to develop an appropriate subset of bonds. Individual bonds are then selected based on the timing of each plan's cash flows and parameters are established as to the percentage of each individual bond issue that could be hypothetically purchased and the surplus reinvestment rates to be assumed. At December 31, 2012, LKE decreased the discount rate for its pension plan from 5.12% to 4.26% and decreased the discount rate for its other postretirement benefit plan from 4.78% to 3.99%. The expected long-term rates of return for LKE's defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans have been developed using a best-estimate of expected returns, volatilities and correlations for each asset class. LKE management corroborates these rates with expected long-term rates of return calculated by its independent actuary, who uses a building block approach that begins with a risk-free rate of return with factors being added such as inflation, duration, credit spreads and equity risk. Each plan's specific asset allocation is also considered in developing a reasonable return assumption. At December 31, 2012, LKE's expected return on plan assets decreased from 7.25% to 7.10% . In selecting a rate of compensation increase, LKE considers past experience in light of movements in inflation rates. At December 31, 2012, LKE's rate of compensation increase remained at 4.00%. In selecting health care cost trend rates LKE considers past performance and forecasts of health care costs. At December 31, 2012, LKE's health care cost trend rates were 8.00% for 2013, gradually declining to 5.50% for 2019. 188 A variance in the assumptions listed above could have a significant impact on accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and regulatory assets and liabilities allocated to KU. While the charts below reflect either an increase or decrease in each assumption, the inverse of the change would impact the accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and regulatory assets and liabilities for KU by a similar amount in the opposite direction. The sensitivities below reflect an evaluation of the change based solely on a change in that assumption and does not include income tax effects. At December 31, 2012, the defined benefit plans were recorded as follows: Pension liabilities $ 104 Other postretirement benefit liabilities 53 The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the December 31, 2012 Balance Sheet associated with a change in certain assumptions based on KU's primary defined benefit plans. Increase (Decrease) Impact on Impact on Change in defined benefit Impact on regulatory Actuarial assumption assumption liabilities OCI assets Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 17 $ 17 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 3 3 Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1% 3 3 (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. In 2012 KU recognized net periodic defined benefit costs charged to operating expense of $11 million. This amount represents a $3 million decrease from 2011. This decrease in expense for 2012 was primarily attributable to the increase in the expected return on plan assets resulting from pension contributions of $15 million, a reduction in the amortization of outstanding losses and lower interest cost. The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the 2012 Statement of Income (excluding income tax effects) associated with a change in certain assumptions based on KU's primary defined benefit plans. Actuarial assumption Change in assumption Impact on defined benefit costs Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 2 Expected Return on Plan Assets (0.25)% 1 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 1 Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1% (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. Asset Impairment (Excluding Investments) Impairment analyses are performed for long-lived assets that are subject to depreciation or amortization whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that a long-lived asset's carrying amount may not be recoverable. For these long-lived assets classified as held and used, such events or changes in circumstances are: a significant decrease in the market price of an asset; a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is being used or in its physical condition; a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate; an accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of an asset; a current-period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of losses or a forecast that demonstrates continuing losses; or a current expectation that, more likely than not, an asset will be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. 189 For a long-lived asset classified as held and used, impairment is recognized when the carrying amount of the asset is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value. The carrying amount is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. If the asset is impaired, an impairment loss is recorded to adjust the asset's carrying amount to its estimated fair value. Management must make significant judgments to estimate future cash flows including the useful lives of long-lived assets, the fair value of the assets and management's intent to use the assets. Alternate courses of action are considered to recover the carrying amount of a long-lived asset, and estimated cash flows from the "most likely" alternative are used to assess impairment whenever one alternative is clearly the most likely outcome. If no alternative is clearly the most likely, then a probability-weighted approach is used taking into consideration estimated cash flows from the alternatives. For assets tested for impairment as of the balance sheet date, the estimates of future cash flows used in that test consider the likelihood of possible outcomes that existed at the balance sheet date, including the assessment of the likelihood of a future sale of the assets. That assessment is not revised based on events that occur after the balance sheet date. Changes in assumptions and estimates could result in significantly different results than those identified and recorded in the financial statements. For a long-lived asset classified as held for sale, impairment exists when the carrying amount of the asset (disposal group) exceeds its fair value less cost to sell. If the asset (disposal group) is impaired, an impairment loss is recorded to adjust the carrying amount to its fair value less cost to sell. A gain is recognized for any subsequent increase in fair value less cost to sell, but not in excess of the cumulative impairment previously recognized. For determining fair value, quoted market prices in active markets are the best evidence. However, when market prices are unavailable, KU considers all valuation techniques appropriate under the circumstances and for which market participant inputs can be obtained. Generally discounted cash flows are used to estimate fair value, which incorporates market participant inputs when available. Discounted cash flows are calculated by estimating future cash flow streams and applying appropriate discount rates to determine the present value of the cash flow streams. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. KU's reporting unit has been determined to be at the operating segment level. A goodwill impairment test is performed annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the reporting unit may be greater than the unit's fair value. Additionally, goodwill is tested for impairment after a portion of goodwill has been allocated to a business to be disposed of. Beginning in 2012, KU may elect either to initially make a qualitative evaluation about the likelihood of an impairment of goodwill or to bypass the qualitative assessment and directly test goodwill for impairment using a two-step quantitative test. If the qualitative evaluation (referred to as "step zero") is elected and the assessment results in a determination that it is not more likely than not the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, the two-step quantitative impairment test is not necessary. However, the quantitative impairment test is required if KU concludes it is more likely than not the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount based on the step zero assessment. When the two-step quantitative impairment test is elected or required as a result of the step zero assessment, in step one, KU identifies a potential impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of KU (the goodwill reporting unit) with its carrying amount, including goodwill, on the measurement date. If the estimated fair value exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill is not considered impaired. If the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value, the second step is performed to measure the amount of impairment loss, if any. The second step of the quantitative test requires a calculation of the implied fair value of goodwill, which is determined in the same manner as the amount of goodwill in a business combination. That is, the estimated fair value is allocated to all of KU's assets and liabilities as if KU had been acquired in a business combination and the estimated fair value of KU was the price paid. The excess of the estimated fair value of KU over the amounts assigned to its assets and liabilities is the implied fair value of goodwill. The implied fair value of KU's goodwill is then compared with the carrying amount of that goodwill. If the carrying amount exceeds the implied fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. The loss recognized cannot exceed the carrying amount of KU's goodwill. KU elected to perform the two-step quantitative impairment test of goodwill in the fourth quarter of 2012 and no impairment was recognized. Management used both discounted cash flows and market multiples, which required significant assumptions, to estimate the fair value of KU. Applying an appropriate weighting to both the discounted cash flow and market multiple valuations, a decrease in the forecasted cash flows of 10%, an increase in the discount rate by 25 basis points, or a 10% decrease in the multiples would not have resulted in an impairment of goodwill. 190 Loss Accruals Losses are accrued for the estimated impacts of various conditions, situations or circumstances involving uncertain or contingent future outcomes. For loss contingencies, the loss must be accrued if (1) information is available that indicates it is probable that a loss has been incurred, given the likelihood of the uncertain future events and (2) the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Accounting guidance defines "probable" as cases in which "the future event or events are likely to occur." The accrual of contingencies that might result in gains is not recorded unless recovery is assured. Potential loss contingencies for environmental remediation, litigation claims, regulatory penalties and other events are continuously assessed. The accounting aspects of estimated loss accruals include (1) the initial identification and recording of the loss, (2) the determination of triggering events for reducing a recorded loss accrual and (3) the ongoing assessment as to whether a recorded loss accrual is sufficient. All three of these aspects require significant judgment by management. Internal expertise and outside experts (such as lawyers and engineers) are used, as necessary to help estimate the probability that a loss has been incurred and the amount (or range) of the loss. In 2012, no significant adjustments were made to KU's existing contingencies. Certain other events have been identified that could give rise to a loss, but that do not meet the conditions for accrual. Such events are disclosed, but not recorded, when it is reasonably possible that a loss has been incurred. Accounting guidance defines "reasonably possible" as cases in which "the future event or events occurring is more than remote, but less than likely to occur." When an estimated loss is accrued, the triggering events for subsequently adjusting the loss accrual are identified, where applicable. The triggering events generally occur when the contingency has been resolved and the actual loss is paid or written off, or when the risk of loss has diminished or been eliminated. The following are some of the triggering events that provide for the adjustment of certain recorded loss accruals: Allowances for uncollectible accounts are reduced when accounts are written off after prescribed collection procedures have been exhausted, a better estimate of the allowance is determined or underlying amounts are ultimately collected. Environmental and other litigation contingencies are reduced when the contingency is resolved, KU makes actual payments, a better estimate of the loss is determined or the loss is no longer considered probable. Loss accruals are reviewed on a regular basis to assure that the recorded potential loss exposures are appropriate. This involves ongoing communication and analyses with internal and external legal counsel, engineers, operation management and other parties. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Asset Retirement Obligations KU is required to recognize a liability for legal obligations associated with the retirement of long-lived assets. The initial obligation is measured at its estimated fair value. An equivalent amount is recorded as an increase in the value of the capitalized asset and allocated to expense over the useful life of the asset. Until the obligation is settled, the liability is increased, through the recognition of accretion expense in the Statements of Income, for changes in the obligation due to the passage of time. Since costs of removal are collected in rates, the accretion and depreciation are offset with a regulatory credit on the income statement, such that there is no earnings impact. The regulatory asset created by the regulatory credit is relieved when the ARO has been settled. An ARO must be recognized when incurred if the fair value of the ARO can be reasonably estimated. See Note 21 to the Financial Statements for related disclosures. In determining AROs, management must make significant judgments and estimates to calculate fair value. Fair value is developed using an expected present value technique based on assumptions of market participants that considers estimated retirement costs in current period dollars that are inflated to the anticipated retirement date and then discounted back to the date the ARO was incurred. Changes in assumptions and estimates included within the calculations of the fair value of AROs could result in significantly different results than those identified and recorded in the financial statements. Estimated ARO costs and settlement dates, which affect the carrying value of various AROs and the related assets, are reviewed periodically to ensure that any material changes are incorporated into the estimate of the obligations. Any change to the capitalized asset is amortized over the remaining life of the associated long-lived asset. At December 31, 2012, KU had AROs totaling $69 million recorded on the Balance Sheet. Of the total amount, $51 million, or 74%, relates to KU's ash ponds and landfill. The most significant assumptions surrounding AROs are the forecasted retirement costs, the discount rates and the inflation rates. A variance in the forecasted retirement costs, the discount rates or the inflation rates could have a significant impact on the ARO liabilities. 191 The following chart reflects the sensitivities related to KU's ARO liabilities for ash ponds and landfill at December 31, 2012: Change in Impact on Assumption ARO Liability Retirement Cost 10% $ 6 Discount Rate (0.25)% 2 Inflation Rate 0.25% 3 Income Taxes Significant management judgment is required in developing the provision for income taxes, primarily due to the uncertainty related to tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns and the determination of deferred tax assets, liabilities and valuation allowances. Significant management judgment is required to determine the amount of benefit recognized related to an uncertain tax position. Tax positions are evaluated following a two-step process. The first step requires an entity to determine whether, based on the technical merits supporting a particular tax position, it is more likely than not (greater than a 50% chance) that the tax position will be sustained. This determination assumes that the relevant taxing authority will examine the tax position and is aware of all the relevant facts surrounding the tax position. The second step requires an entity to recognize in the financial statements the benefit of a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition criterion. The benefit recognized is measured at the largest amount of benefit that has a likelihood of realization, upon settlement, that exceeds 50%. Management considers a number of factors in assessing the benefit to be recognized, including negotiation of a settlement. On a quarterly basis, uncertain tax positions are reassessed by considering information known at the reporting date. Based on management's assessment of new information, a tax benefit may subsequently be recognized for a previously unrecognized tax position, a previously recognized tax position may be derecognized, or the benefit of a previously recognized tax position may be remeasured. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of issues raised by taxing authorities may differ materially from the amounts accrued and may materially impact the financial statements in the future. At December 31, 2012, KU's existing reserve exposure to either increases or decreases in unrecognized tax benefits during the next 12 months is less than $1 million. This change could result from subsequent recognition, derecognition and/or changes in the measurement of uncertain tax positions. The events that could cause these changes are direct settlements with taxing authorities, litigation, legal or administrative guidance by relevant taxing authorities and the lapse of an applicable statute of limitation. The balance sheet classification of unrecognized tax benefits and the need for valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets also require significant management judgment. Unrecognized tax benefits are classified as current to the extent management expects to settle an uncertain tax position by payment or receipt of cash within one year of the reporting date. Valuation allowances are initially recorded and reevaluated each reporting period by assessing the likelihood of the ultimate realization of a deferred tax asset. Management considers a number of factors in assessing the realization of a deferred tax asset, including the reversal of temporary differences, future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Any tax planning strategy utilized in this assessment must meet the recognition and measurement criteria utilized to account for an uncertain tax position. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for related disclosures. Regulatory Assets and Liabilities KU is a cost-based rate-regulated utility. As a result, the effects of regulatory actions are required to be reflected in the financial statements. Assets and liabilities are recorded that result from the regulated ratemaking process that may not be recorded under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such costs are probable of future recovery in regulated customer rates. Regulatory liabilities are recognized for amounts expected to be returned through future regulated customer rates. In certain cases, regulatory liabilities are recorded based on an understanding with the regulator that rates have been set to recover costs that are expected to be incurred in the future, and the regulated entity is accountable for any amounts charged pursuant to such rates and not yet expended for the intended purpose. The accounting for regulatory assets and liabilities is based on specific ratemaking decisions or precedent for each transaction or event as prescribed by the FERC, the KPSC, the VSCC or the TRA. 192 Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as changes in the applicable regulatory and political environments, the ability to recover costs through regulated rates, recent rate orders to other regulated entities and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. Based on this continual assessment, management believes the existing regulatory assets are probable of recovery. This assessment reflects the current political and regulatory climate at the state and federal levels, and is subject to change in the future. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, then asset write-off would be required to be recognized in operating income. Additionally, the regulatory agencies can provide flexibility in the manner and timing of the depreciation of PP&E and amortization of regulatory assets. At December 31, 2012, KU had regulatory assets of $230 million and regulatory liabilities of $536 million. All regulatory assets are either currently being recovered under specific rate orders, represent amounts that are expected to be recovered in future rates or benefit future periods based upon established regulatory practices. See Note 6 to the Financial Statements for additional information on regulatory assets and liabilities. Other Information PPL's Audit Committee has approved the independent auditor to provide audit, tax and other services permitted by Sarbanes-Oxley and SEC rules. The audit services include services in connection with statutory and regulatory filings, reviews of offering documents and registration statements, and internal control reviews. See "Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services" for more information. 193 
