CIK: 936468
Company Name: LOCKHEED MARTIN CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-02-28


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Financial Section Roadmap The financial section of our Annual Report includes management discussion and analysis, our consolidated financial statements, notes to those financial statements and a five-year summary of financial information. We have prepared the following summary, or roadmap, to assist in your review of the financial section. It is designed to give you an overview of our company and focus your review by directing you to some of the more important activities and events that occurred this year. Lockheed Martin Business Lockheed Martin Corporation principally researches, designs, develops, manufactures, integrates, operates and sustains advanced technology systems, products and services. We mainly serve customers in domestic and international defense, civil markets, and homeland security, and about 80% of our sales over the past three years have been to agencies of the U.S. Government. Our main areas of focus are in the defense, space, intelligence/homeland security, and government information technology markets. Our commercial activities represent about 4% of our sales in 2004 and primarily relate to launch services and satellites. We operate in five principal business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, Space Systems, Integrated Systems & Solutions (IS&S), and Information & Technology Services (I&TS). As a lead systems integrator, our products and services range from electronics and information systems, including integrated net-centric solutions, to missiles, aircraft, spacecraft and launch services. Financial Section Overview The financial section includes the following: Management discussion and analysis, or MD&A (pages 28 through 50) provides management view about industry trends, risks and uncertainties relating to Lockheed Martin, accounting policies that we view as critical in light of our business, our results of operations, including discussions about the key performance drivers of each of our business segments, our financial position and cash flows, commitments and contingencies, important events or transactions that have occurred over the last three years, and forward-looking information, as appropriate. Reports related to the financial statements and internal control over financial reporting (pages 51 through 53) include the following: A report from our management, indicating our responsibility for financial reporting and the financial statements, and for a system of internal control over financial reporting and our assessment of its effectiveness; A report from Ernst & Young LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, which includes their opinions on management assessment of our internal control over financial reporting and the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting; and A report from Ernst & Young LLP, which includes their opinion on the fair presentation of our financial statements based on their audits. The report includes their opinion on our financial statements being in conformity with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Financial statements (pages 54 through 57) include our consolidated statements of earnings, cash flows and stockholders equity for each of the last three years, and our balance sheet as of the end of the last two years. Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Notes to the financial statements (pages 58 through 84) provide insight into and are an integral part of our financial statements. There are explanations of our significant accounting policies, details about certain of the captions on the financial statements, information about significant events or transactions that have occurred, discussions about legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies and selected financial information relating to our business segments. The notes to the financial statements also are prepared in accordance with GAAP. 28 Highlights The financial section of our Annual Report describes our ongoing operations, including discussions about particular lines of business or programs, our ability to finance our operating activities and trends and uncertainties in our industry and how they might affect our future operations. We also discuss those items affecting our results that were not considered in senior management assessment of the operating performance of our business segments. We separately disclose these items to assist in your evaluation of our overall operating performance and financial condition of the consolidated company. We would like to draw your attention to the following items disclosed in this financial section and where you will find them: Topic Location(s) Critical accounting policies: Contract accounting/revenue recognition Page 34 Post-retirement benefit plans Page 35 and page 71 Environmental matters Page 36, page 59 and page 77 Discussion of business segments Page 40 and page 77 Liquidity and cash flows Page 45 and page 56 Capital structure and resources Page 47, page 55 and page 57 Legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies Page 48 and page 75 Stock-based compensation Page 50, page 60 and page 69 29 Industry Considerations Defense Business Considerations The markets for defense and related advanced technology systems for 2005 and beyond will continue to be affected by the global war on terrorism, through the continued need for military missions and reconstruction efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan and the related fiscal consequences of war. The realities of the war on terrorism have focused greater attention on the security of our homeland and better communication and interplay between law enforcement, civil government agencies, intelligence agencies and our military services. At the same time, our nation overall defense posture continues to move toward a more capabilities-based structure, which creates the ability for a more flexible response with greater force mobility, stronger space capabilities, enhanced missile defense and improved information systems capabilities and security. We anticipate that the next Congressionally mandated Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) undertaken by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) will reinforce and advance efforts at the DoD to refocus activities toward joint operations, net-centric command and control, and integrated capabilities for the armed forces. To address this customer priority, we formed the Integrated Systems & Solutions business segment and established the Center for Innovation to help us better focus our integrated solutions capabilities across the Corporation and enhance our ability to serve as a lead partner with the DoD. The President budget for fiscal year 2006 and beyond represents an agenda for a second term in office, and presents a framework to reduce the federal budget deficit while aggressively prosecuting the global war on terrorism. The rate of growth for budget increases at the DoD is reduced, while spending across non-defense federal agencies is projected to decline through 2011. These changes in the White House budget plan reflect a commitment to cut the federal budget deficit in half by 2009, and sentiment expressed by the Federal Reserve that sustained federal deficits could hamper economic growth. The Future Years Defense Plan (FYDP) submitted with the President budget request for fiscal year 2006 projects a strong commitment to research and development of transformational capabilities across the military services, while reducing quantities of near-term systems compared to previous projections. As has been widely reported, the President budget request for fiscal year 2006 includes $419.3 billion for overall defense spending and proposes reductions in funding for a number of existing defense programs, including out-year reductions to the F/A-22 and C-130J programs and termination in 2006 of the Joint Common Missile and other programs in which Lockheed Martin participates. We are actively participating in and monitoring discussions regarding these proposals, but are unable to predict the extent to which these proposals ultimately will be approved as part of the 2006 or subsequent budgets approved by Congress or what the ultimate impact on Lockheed Martin would be. Many key decisions on future program quantities and force structure will be reached through the QDR and the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) actions to be undertaken in 2005. Budget pressures within DoD also may create additional opportunities for business process management and outsourcing of service functions by the military services, expanding the scope of private sector contracting opportunities at the DoD. In September 2004, Congress passed an initial $25 billion supplemental appropriation to defray costs for Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom during the first quarter of fiscal year 2005. The Administration has requested an additional $80 billion to meet these costs through the remainder of 2005. These supplemental appropriations enabled the DoD to proceed on critical modernization and acquisition programs, versus using amounts available for those programs to pay for the Iraq and Afghanistan missions. Congress will likely act on this further 2005 supplemental request by April 2005. While there is no assurance that additional supplemental appropriations will be approved by Congress, we do not anticipate that sustained operations in Iraq and Afghanistan will materially impact the procurement and research and development budget levels projected in the near term. Our broad mix of programs and capabilities gives us the ability to support the needs of the various agencies of the U.S. Government that require our solutions. Our major programs and capabilities include: missile defense; space intelligence; command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C4ISR); air mobility aircraft; and air-power projection/precision-strike capability. In terms of size and long-term potential impact, two of our more significant programs are the F/A-22 Raptor and the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter. The Air Force recently completed the Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E) for the F/A-22 air dominance, attack and multi-mission combat aircraft. The determination that the Raptor is operationally suitable will permit the DoD to complete the upcoming Defense Acquisition Board review which, if successful, will authorize additional production of the F/A-22. We are also represented in almost every aspect of land, sea, air and space-based missile defense, including the AEGIS Weapon System program, Medium Extended Air Defense System (MEADS), the Patriot Advanced Capability (PAC-3) missile program, the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system, and the Multiple Kill Vehicle program. In the areas of space intelligence and information superiority, we have leadership positions on programs such as the Mobile User Objective System (MUOS), the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) system, and the Space-Based Infrared System-High (SBIRS-H), and in classified 30 programs and battle management command and control capabilities. In airlift, we have the C-130J program and are under contract to upgrade the C-5 strategic airlift aircraft. Many of these programs are large and require funding over several budget cycles. As discussed earlier, there are risks associated with these and other large, highly visible programs subject to appropriation by Congress that, because of their size, could be expected to become potential targets for reduction or extension of funding to pay for other programs. The 2005 QDR will assess current and future capabilities required by the DoD, and may result in program and force structure changes to be reflected in future defense budget requests. We continue to expand our capabilities in critical intelligence, knowledge management and E-Government solutions for our customers, including the U.S. Social Security Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the DoD. We provide program management, business strategy and consulting, complex systems development and maintenance, complete life-cycle software support, information assurance and enterprise solutions. Consistent with the President agenda, the expected growth in business process outsourcing has been enabled by rule changes for public/private competitions, such as the recent selection of Lockheed Martin to operate the Federal Aviation Administration Automated Flight Services Station Network. In addition, recent trends have indicated an increase in demand by federal and civil government agencies for upgrading and investing in new information technology systems and solutions. As a result, we continue to focus our resources in support of infrastructure modernization that allows for interoperability and communication across agencies. In addition, the increase in emphasis on homeland security may increase demand for our capabilities in areas such as air traffic management, ports and waterways security, biohazard detection systems for postal equipment, information systems security and other technical systems solutions. During the 1990s, companies in our industry reacted to shrinking defense budgets for procurement and research and development by combining to maintain critical mass. More recently, we have sought to expand into adjacent product lines such as with the Littoral Combat Ship program and the recently awarded Marine One U.S. Presidential Helicopter contract. In addition, we have focused our efforts on select core acquisitions, cost savings and improving efficiency, as well as generating cash to repay debt incurred during the period of consolidation. Through these activities, we have been able to pass along savings to our customers, mainly the DoD. Non-U.S. defense budgets have generally been flat or declining over the past decade. As a result, consolidation has also been occurring in the European aerospace industry, resulting in fewer but larger and more capable competitors. 31 Space Business The commercial launch vehicle marketplace remains very competitive due mainly to lower-than-expected demand for new satellites as a result of excess capacity in the telecommunications industry. The reduction in demand has resulted in pricing pressures in both the launch vehicle and satellite markets. We received new orders for both commercial satellites and launch vehicles in both 2003 and 2004. The above factors have impacted orders for our commercial launch vehicles, including the Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV or Atlas V), our next generation launch vehicle program in which we have made significant investments over the past few years. The Atlas V is available for both commercial and U.S. Government use. This program has required investment of funds for research and development, start-up and other nonrecurring costs, and launch facilities. Some of these expenditures have been funded under an agreement with the U.S. Government. Commercial orders to-date for the Atlas V launch vehicle have been lower than originally expected and at lower prices. However, we have received a total of 19 launch assignments from the U.S. Government (including those described in the following paragraph), six of which are under contract and in backlog. The U.S. Government has been awarding missions incrementally as it continues to develop its acquisition strategy for future national missions. We had six Atlas launches in 2004, including our fourth Atlas V commercial launch. As of year-end 2004, the Atlas family of launch vehicles had a record of 74 consecutive successful launches. In July 2003, the U.S. Air Force announced that our competitor in the EELV competition had violated the Procurement Integrity Act. As a result of that determination, the Air Force reassigned seven launch vehicles from the initial competition (referred to as Buy I ) to us and removed our exclusion from West Coast launches. At the same time, the Air Force assigned us three new West Coast launches. To prepare for these, we are upgrading West Coast launch facilities, which requires further investment in the EELV program (see Note 5 to the financial statements). The investment will be recovered through pricing of the West Coast launches. The seven reassigned launches are expected to occur over the 2006 through 2009 time period. It is currently anticipated that the West Coast launch facilities will be operational during 2005. The U.S. Government wants to maintain assured access to space to the maximum extent possible and has recognized the need to fund additional EELV infrastructure costs created by the weaker-than-originally-anticipated commercial market for launch services. The assured access monies approved in the 2005 defense budget will cover a portion of these costs. There is no assurance that the assured access funding provided for in the President fiscal year 2006 budget request will be approved by Congress. Lockheed-Khrunichev-Energia International, Inc. (LKEI), a joint venture we have with two Russian government-owned space firms, has exclusive rights to market launches of commercial, non-Russian-origin space payloads on the Proton family of rockets from a launch site in Kazakhstan. Commercial Atlas and Proton launch services are marketed around the world through International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and LKEI. We consolidate the results of operations of LKEI and ILS into our financial statements based on our controlling financial interest. We received six new awards for launches on Proton vehicles in 2004. Contracts for launch services usually require substantial advances from the customer prior to launch. At the end of 2004, $348 million of advances received from customers for Proton launch services not yet provided was included as a liability in our balance sheet in customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred. A sizeable percentage of the advances we receive from customers for Proton launch services are sent to Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center (Khrunichev), the manufacturer of the launch vehicle and provider of the related launch services in Russia. If a contracted launch service is not provided, a sizeable percentage of the related advance would have to be refunded to our customer. In addition, we have sent advances to Khrunichev for launches we purchased which have not yet been assigned to our customers. The advances sent to Khrunichev are included on our balance sheet in inventories. Advances for launches not under contract are subject to an agreement entered into in 2002 which provides for reduced future launch payments from us to Khrunichev, contingent on the receipt of new orders as well as a minimum number of actual launches each year. At year-end 2004, payments to Khrunichev included in inventories totaled $301 million. Our ability to realize the remaining amounts may be affected by Khrunichev ability to provide the launch services and the political environment in Russia. Through the end of 2004, launch services through LKEI and ILS have been provided according to contract terms. The Corporation has entered into an agreement with RD AMROSS, a joint venture of the Pratt & Whitney division of United Technologies Corporation and the Russian firm NPO Energomash, for the purchase, subject to certain conditions, of RD-180 booster engines for use in the Corporation Atlas launch vehicles. Terms of the agreement call for payments to be made to RD AMROSS upon the achievement of certain milestones in the manufacturing process. Payments of $64 million made under this agreement for engines not yet delivered were included in the Corporation inventories at December 31, 2004. In prior years, the U.S. Department of State has authorized one year International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) license extensions authorizing Lockheed Martin to have discussions with NPO Energomash on the RD-180 Engine and its use on the Atlas V 32 launch vehicle. In 2004, the U.S. Department of State issued a three year license extension, therefore mitigating the need for the annual license renewal process, and providing for longer term stability for Atlas V sales. In addition, the Proton launch services license also was extended for three years. As discussed above, the commercial satellite market has continued to experience pricing pressures due to excess capacity. However, in the past two years, we have received seven commercial satellite orders and are in active discussions for additional satellite orders. We expect to continue to control costs in our commercial satellite manufacturing business while keeping our focus on providing a reliable product. In addition to commercial activity, we also have received new orders for government satellites in 2004 including the MUOS program and certain classified activities. A significant portion of the work on the MUOS program will be performed in our commercial satellite manufacturing facility. Other Business Considerations As a government contractor, we are subject to U.S. Government oversight. The government may ask about and investigate our business practices and audit our compliance with applicable rules and regulations. Depending on the results of those audits and investigations, the government could make claims against us. Under government procurement regulations and practices, an indictment of a government contractor could result in that contractor being fined and/or suspended from being able to bid on, or be awarded, new government contracts for a period of time. A conviction could result in debarment for a specific period of time. Similar government oversight exists in most other countries where we conduct business. Although we cannot predict the outcome of these types of investigations and inquiries with certainty, based on current facts, we do not believe that any of the claims, audits or investigations pending against us are likely to have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. Changes in government procurement policies and practices over the past several years, such as increases in the progress payment rate and the use of performance-based payments, have had a positive effect on our financial position and cash flows. But we are still exposed to risks associated with U.S. Government contracting, including technological uncertainties, dependence on fewer manufacturing suppliers and obsolescence, as well as Congressional appropriation and allotment of funds each year. Many of our programs involve the development and application of state-of-the-art technologies aimed at achieving challenging goals. As a result, setbacks, delays, cost growth and product failures can occur. We provide products and services to government agencies such as the Departments of Energy, Homeland Security, Justice, and Health and Human Services, the U.S. Postal Service, the Social Security Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the U.S. Coast Guard and the Transportation Security Administration. Although our lines of business addressing civil government needs are not dependent on defense budgets, they share many of the same risks as our defense businesses, as well as other risks unique to the particular programs. Although indemnification by the U.S. Government to cover potential claims or liabilities resulting from a failure of technologies developed and deployed may be available in some instances for our defense businesses, U.S. Government indemnification may not be available for homeland security purposes. While we maintain insurance for some business risks, it is not possible to obtain coverage to protect against all operational risks and liabilities. We do plan to seek, and in certain cases have obtained, limitation of such potential liabilities related to the sale and use of our homeland security products and services through qualification by the Department of Homeland Security under the SAFETY Act provisions of the Homeland Security Act of 2002. During 2004, we received SAFETY Act approvals for two such activities. In the event we were to provide homeland security-related products and services to a customer without such qualification, we would not be afforded the benefit of the SAFETY Act cap on tort liability or U.S. Government indemnification. Other risks unique to the civil government markets may include development of competing products, technological feasibility and product obsolescence. We provide products and services to NASA, including the Space Shuttle program, mainly through our Space Systems and Information & Technology Services business segments. We also have a 50% equity interest in United Space Alliance, LLC which provides ground processing and other operational services to the Space Shuttle program. We are committed to securing return to flight of the Space Shuttle in 2005. We expect to compete for NASA programs related to the new Space Exploration Vision announced by the President and funded by Congress for fiscal year 2005. We have entered into various joint venture, teaming and other business arrangements to help support our portfolio of products and services in many of our lines of business, including commercial space. Some of these business arrangements include foreign partners. The conduct of international business introduces other risks into our operations, including changing economic conditions, fluctuations in relative currency values, regulation by foreign countries and the potential for unanticipated cost increases resulting from the possible deterioration of political relations. The nature of our international business also makes us subject to the export control regulations of the U.S. Department of State and the Department of Commerce. If these regulations are violated, it could result in monetary penalties and denial of export 33 privileges. We are currently unaware of any violations of export control regulations which are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. Critical Accounting Policies Contract Accounting / Revenue Recognition A large part of our business is derived from long-term contracts for development, production and service activities which we account for consistent with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) audit and accounting guide, Audits of Federal Government Contractors , the AICPA Statement of Position 81-1, Accounting for Performance of Construction-Type and Certain Production-Type Contracts , and other relevant revenue recognition accounting literature. We consider the nature of these contracts and the types of products and services provided when we determine the proper accounting for a particular contract. Generally, we record long-term, fixed-price contracts on a percentage of completion basis using units-of-delivery as the basis to measure progress toward completing the contract and recognizing sales. For example, we use this method of revenue recognition on our C-130J tactical transport aircraft program, Atlas and Proton launch vehicle programs, and Multiple Launch Rocket System program. For certain other long-term, fixed-price contracts that, along with other factors, require us to deliver minimal quantities over a longer period of time or to perform a substantial level of development effort in comparison to the total value of the contract, sales are recorded when we achieve performance milestones or using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress toward completion. Under the cost-to-cost method of accounting, we recognize sales based on the ratio of costs incurred to our estimate of total costs at completion. As examples, we use this methodology for our F/A-22 Raptor program and the AEGIS Weapon System program. In some instances, long-term production programs may require a significant level of development and/or a low level of initial production units in their early phases, but will ultimately require delivery of increased quantities in later, full rate production stages. In those cases, the revenue recognition methodology may change from the cost-to-cost method to the units-of-delivery method after considering, among other factors, program and production stability. As we incur costs under cost-reimbursement-type contracts, we record sales. Cost-reimbursement-type contracts include time and materials and other level-of-effort-type contracts. Examples of this type of revenue recognition include the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter system development and demonstration (SDD) program and the THAAD missile defense program. Most of our long-term contracts are denominated in U.S. dollars, including contracts for sales of military products and services to foreign governments conducted through the U.S. Government (i.e., foreign military sales). As a general rule, we recognize sales and profits earlier in a production cycle when we use the cost-to-cost and milestone methods of percentage of completion accounting than when we use the units-of-delivery method. In addition, our profits and margins may vary materially depending on the types of long-term government contracts undertaken, the costs incurred in their performance, the achievement of other performance objectives, and the stage of performance at which the right to receive fees, particularly under incentive and award fee contracts, is finally determined. We have accounting policies in place to address these as well as other contractual and business arrangements in accounting for long-term contracts. For other information on accounting policies we have in place for recognizing sales and profits, see our discussion under Sales and earnings in Note 1 to the financial statements. Contract accounting requires judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract revenues and costs, and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. Due to the size and nature of many of our contracts, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. Contract costs include material, labor and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs. Assumptions have to be made regarding the length of time to complete the contract because costs also include expected increases in wages and prices for materials. For contract change orders, claims or similar items, we apply judgment in estimating the amounts and assessing the potential for realization. These amounts are only included in contract value when they can be reliably estimated and realization is considered probable. Incentives and award fees related to performance on contracts, which are generally awarded at the discretion of the customer, as well as penalties related to contract performance, are considered in estimating sales and profit rates. Incentives and penalties are recorded when there is sufficient information for us to assess anticipated performance. Award fees are recorded based on actual awards and anticipated performance. The majority of our sales are driven by pricing based on costs incurred to produce products or perform services under contracts with the U.S. Government, and therefore not necessarily on market-based factors. Cost-based pricing is determined under the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR). The FAR provides guidance on the types of costs that are allowable in establishing prices for goods and services under U.S. Government contracts. For example, costs such as those related to charitable contributions, advertising, interest expense, and public relations are unallowable, and therefore not recoverable through sales. In addition, we may enter into agreements with the U.S. Government that address the subjects of allowability and allocability of costs to contracts for specific matters. For example, some of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation related to discontinued operations and sites operated in prior years are allocated to our current operations as general and administrative costs under agreements reached with the U.S. Government. 34 Products and services provided under long-term development and production contracts make up a large portion of our business. Therefore, the amounts we record in our financial statements using contract accounting methods and cost accounting standards are material. Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. When adjustments in estimated contract revenues or costs are required, any changes from prior estimates are generally included in earnings in the current period. We closely monitor compliance with and the consistent application of our critical accounting policies related to contract accounting. Business segment personnel assess the status of contracts through periodic contract status and performance reviews. Also, regular and recurring evaluations of contract cost, scheduling and technical matters are performed by management personnel separately from the business segment performing work under the contract. Costs incurred and allocated to contracts with the U.S. Government are reviewed for compliance with regulatory standards by our personnel, and are subject to audit by the Defense Contract Audit Agency. Post-Retirement Benefit Plans Most employees are covered by defined benefit pension plans (pension plans), and we provide health care and life insurance benefits to eligible retirees. Our earnings may be negatively or positively impacted by the amount of expense or income we record for our employee benefit plans. This is particularly true with expense or income for pension plans because those calculations are sensitive to changes in several key economic assumptions and workforce demographics. We account for our pension plans using Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (FAS) 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions . Those rules require that the amounts we record, including the expense or income for the plans, be computed using actuarial valuations. These valuations include many assumptions, including assumptions we make relating to financial market and other economic conditions. Changes in key economic indicators can result in changes in the assumptions we use. The key year-end assumptions used to estimate pension expense or income for the following fiscal year are the discount rate, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and the rate of increase in future compensation levels. We use judgment in reassessing these assumptions each year because we have to consider current market conditions and, in the case of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, past investment experience, judgments about future market trends, changes in interest rates and equity market performance. We also have to consider factors like the timing and amounts of expected contributions to the plans and benefit payments to plan participants. An example of how changes in these assumptions can affect our financial statements occurred in 2004. We reassess the discount rate assumption at the end of each year. Based on our review of interest rates at the end of the year, we lowered our discount rate assumption to 5.75% at year-end 2004, compared to 6.25% used at the end of 2003. This change, together with other factors such as the effects of the actual return on plan assets over the past few years, resulted in our projecting that the amount of pension expense for 2005 will increase by approximately 25% to 30% as compared to 2004 expense. The change in the discount rate is the main factor causing this result. The decrease of 50 basis points in the discount rate increased the estimated 2005 pension expense by approximately $160 million. This annual review of our pension plan assumptions also affects the pension liability recorded in our balance sheet. At the end of each of the last three years, we recorded a noncash after-tax adjustment in the stockholders equity section of our balance sheet to reflect a minimum pension liability for most of our pension plans. These adjustments were calculated on a plan-by-plan basis, and were determined by comparing the accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) for each plan to the fair value of that plan assets. The amount by which the ABO exceeds the fair value of the plan assets, after adjusting for previously recorded accrued or prepaid pension cost for the plan, must be recorded as a minimum pension liability, with a corresponding increase in an intangible asset, if appropriate, and a reduction to stockholders equity. In 2004, the adjustment we recorded reduced stockholders equity by about $275 million, mainly due to the change in the discount rate at December 31, 2004. This comes after stockholders equity increased by about $300 million from the adjustment made in 2003, mainly due to favorable asset returns for the year. At the end of 2002, the adjustment reduced stockholders equity by $1.5 billion. These minimum pension liability adjustments did not impact earnings. The amount of the minimum pension liability is computed at each year-end and could decrease or increase depending on changes in interest rates and other factors. U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS) are a major factor in determining our funding requirements and govern the extent to which our pension costs are allocable to and recoverable under contracts with the U.S Government. Funded amounts are recovered over time through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore are recognized in our net sales. The total funding requirement for pension plans under CAS in 2004 was $289 million. For 2005, we expect our funding requirements under CAS to increase. Also in 2005, funding in addition to the amount calculated under CAS will likely be required under Internal Revenue Code rules. Any additional amounts computed under those rules are considered to be prepayments under the CAS rules, and therefore are recorded on our balance sheet and recovered in future periods. In 2004 and 2003, we made discretionary 35 prepayments of $485 million and $450 million, respectively, to the pension trust, which reduced or will reduce our cash funding requirements in the following year. The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension expense calculated in accordance with FAS 87 and pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS. Since the CAS expense is recovered through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore recognized in a particular segment net sales, the results of operations of our segments only include pension expense as determined and funded in accordance with CAS rules. Accordingly, the FAS/CAS adjustment is an amount included in the reconciliation of total segment operating profit to consolidated operating profit under GAAP. See the discussion of Net Unallocated Corporate (Expense) Income under Discussion of Business Segments. The Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 (the Act) was signed into law in December 2003. Under the Act, Medicare will provide a prescription drug benefit beginning in 2006. Based on current estimates and pending review of the final regulations related to the Act, we calculated a reduction in our retiree healthcare benefit obligation of $295 million at December 31, 2004. The impact on net earnings of the reduction in the net periodic post-retirement benefits cost for 2005, after application of government contracting regulations, is not expected to be material. Environmental Matters We are a party to various agreements, proceedings and potential proceedings for environmental clean-up issues, including matters at various sites where we have been designated a potentially responsible party (PRP) by the Environmental Protection Agency or by a state agency. We record financial statement accruals for environmental matters in the period that it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred and the amounts can be reasonably estimated (see the discussion under Environmental matters in Note 1 to the financial statements). Judgment is required when we develop assumptions and estimate costs expected to be incurred for environmental remediation activities due to, along with other factors, difficulties in assessing the extent of environmental remediation to be performed, complex environmental regulations and remediation technologies, and agreements between PRPs to share in the cost of remediation as discussed below. We enter into agreements (e.g., administrative orders, consent decrees) which document the extent and timing of our obligation. We are also involved in remediation activities at environmental sites where formal agreements exist but do not quantify the extent and timing of our obligation. Environmental clean-up activities usually cover several years, which makes estimating the costs more judgmental due to, for example, changing remediation technologies. To determine the costs related to clean-up sites, we have to assess the extent of contamination, the appropriate technology to be used to accomplish the remediation and continually evolving regulatory environmental standards. We consider these factors in our estimates of the timing and amount of any future costs that may be required for remediation actions. In cases where a date to complete activities at a particular environmental site cannot be estimated by reference to agreements or otherwise, we project costs over a reasonable time frame not to exceed 20 years. Given the level of judgment and estimation which has to occur, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if different assumptions were used or if circumstances were to change (e.g., a change in environmental standards). If we are ultimately found to have liability at those sites where we have been designated a PRP, we expect that the actual costs of remediation will be shared with other liable PRPs. Generally, PRPs that are ultimately determined to be responsible parties are strictly liable for site clean-up and usually agree among themselves to share, on an allocated basis, the costs and expenses for investigation and remediation of hazardous materials. Under existing environmental laws, however, responsible parties are jointly and severally liable and, therefore, we are potentially liable for the full cost of funding such remediation. In the unlikely event that we were required to fund the entire cost of such remediation, the statutory framework provides that we may pursue rights of contribution from the other PRPs. The amounts we record do not reflect the fact that we may recover some of the environmental costs we have incurred through insurance or from other PRPs, which we are required to pursue by agreement and U.S. Government regulation. Under agreements reached with the U.S. Government, some of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation are allocated to our operations as general and administrative costs. Under existing government regulations, these and other environmental expenditures relating to our U.S. Government business, after deducting any recoveries received from insurance or other PRPs, are allowable in establishing prices of our products and services. As a result, a substantial amount of the expenditures we incur are being included in our sales and cost of sales according to U.S. Government agreement or regulation. 36 At the end of 2004, the total amount of liabilities recorded on our balance sheet for environmental matters was approximately $420 million. About 60% of the liability relates to sites in Redlands, Burbank and Glendale, California, and in Great Neck, New York, mainly for remediation of soil and groundwater contamination. The remainder of the liability related to other properties (including current operating facilities and certain facilities operated in prior years) for which our obligation is probable and the financial exposure can be estimated. We have recorded an asset for the portion of environmental costs that are probable of future recovery in pricing of our products and services for U.S. Government businesses. The amount that is expected to be allocated to our commercial businesses has been expensed through cost of sales. Any recoveries we receive would reduce the allocated amounts included in our future U.S. Government sales and cost of sales. 37 Acquisition and Divestiture Activities We continuously strive to strengthen our portfolio of products and services to meet the current and future needs of our customers. This is accomplished internally, through our independent research and development activities or with acquisitions. We selectively pursue the acquisition of businesses that complement our current portfolio and allow expansion into adjacent markets or access to new technologies. We have made a number of such niche acquisitions during the past several years. In February 2005, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire The SYTEX Group, Inc. (TSGI) for net consideration of $462 million. TSGI provides information technology solutions and technical support services to the DoD and other federal agencies. The transaction is subject to government approvals, including a review under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act and satisfaction of other closing conditions. We expect the transaction will close in early 2005. In June 2004, we terminated our September 2003 merger agreement, as amended, with The Titan Corporation, as certain closing conditions were not met on or before June 25, 2004 as required. We may also explore the sale of non-core businesses and surplus real estate. If we were to decide to sell any such businesses or real estate, the resulting gains, if any, would be recorded when the transactions are consummated and losses, if any, would be recorded when the value of the related asset is determined to be impaired. Results of Operations Since our operating cycle is long-term and involves many types of development and production contracts with varying production delivery schedules, the results of operations of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of recorded sales and profits, may not be indicative of future operating results. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context. All per share amounts cited in this discussion are presented on a per diluted share basis. Net Sales (In billions) The following discussion of net sales and operating results will provide an overview of our operations by focusing on key elements set forth in our statement of earnings. The Discussion of Business Segments which follows, will describe the contributions of each of our business segments to our consolidated results for 2004, 2003 and 2002. 38 For 2004, net sales were $35.5 billion, a 12% increase over 2003 sales. Sales for 2003 were $31.8 billion, an increase of 20% compared to 2002. Sales increased in all segments as compared to the prior year for the third straight year. The U.S. Government is our largest customer, accounting for about 80% of our sales for 2004, compared to 78% in 2003 and 80% in 2002. For 2004, 2003 and 2002 the operating (loss) profit items in the table below, in addition to other items, were included in Net Unallocated Corporate (Expense) Income (see the related Discussion of Business Segments below). (In millions, except per share data) Operating (Loss) Profit Net (Loss) Earnings (Loss) Earnings Per Share Year ended December 31, 2004 Charge for Pit 9 litigation $ (180 ) $ (117 ) $ (0.26 ) Charge for early retirement of debt (154 ) (100 ) (0.22 ) Gain on sale of interest in New Skies 91 59 0.13 Gain on sale of COMSAT General business 28 4 0.01 Benefit from closure of an IRS examination 144 0.32 $ (215 ) $ (10 ) $ (0.02 ) Year ended December 31, 2003 Charge for early retirement of debt $ (146 ) $ (96 ) $ (0.21 ) Charge related to exit from the commercial mail sorting business (41 ) (27 ) (0.06 ) Gain on partial reversal of Space Imaging charge 19 13 0.03 Gain on sale of the commercial IT business 15 8 0.02 $ (153 ) $ (102 ) $ (0.22 ) Year ended December 31, 2002 Write-down of telecommunications investments $ (776 ) $ (504 ) $ (1.12 ) Charge related to a Russian launch services provider (173 ) (112 ) (0.25 ) Write-down of investment in Space Imaging and charge related to recording of guarantee (163 ) (106 ) (0.23 ) Benefit from R&D tax credit settlement 90 0.20 $ (1,112 ) $ (632 ) $ (1.40 ) Our operating profit for 2004 was $2.1 billion, an increase of 3% compared to 2003. Our operating profit for 2003 was $2.0 billion, an increase of 74% compared to 2002. Interest expense for 2004 was $425 million, $62 million lower than in 2003 mainly due to reductions in our debt portfolio. Interest expense for 2003 was $487 million, $94 million lower than the amount for 2002. This was primarily the result of reductions in our debt portfolio and the favorable impact of having issued $1.0 billion of floating rate convertible notes in August 2003 to replace higher cost fixed rate debt. Our effective tax rates were 23.9% for 2004, 31.3% for 2003 and 7.7% for 2002. A $144 million reduction in our income tax expense primarily resulting from the closure of an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) examination reduced our 2004 tax rate. A $90 million tax benefit related to settlement of a research and development tax credit claim reduced our tax rate for 2002. Tax benefits related to export sales, tax refund initiatives, and adjustments to true-up actual tax return liabilities reduced our tax rate for each of the three years. Recently enacted tax legislation has repealed the Extraterritorial Income (ETI) exclusion relating to export sales. Over a transition period beginning in 2005, the new tax rules phase-out the ETI exclusion benefit and provide for a new tax deduction in computing profits from the sale of products manufactured in the United States. The tax benefit we realize from the new legislation is expected to be substantially equivalent to the benefit we realized under the repealed ETI exclusion. Net earnings increased as compared to the prior year for the third straight year. We reported net earnings of $1.3 billion ($2.83 per share) in 2004, compared to net earnings of $1.1 billion ($2.34 per share) in 2003. Net earnings for 2002 were $500 million ($1.11 per share), and reflected losses from discontinued operations of $33 million ($0.07 per share). 39 Discussion of Business Segments We operate in five business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, Space Systems, Integrated Systems & Solutions (IS&S) and Information & Technology Services (I&TS). Net sales have increased in each of our business segments over the last three years. Our demonstrated performance and broad portfolio of capabilities have contributed to this growth. In the Aeronautics business segment, sales growth has been driven by Combat Aircraft activities, which made up over 80% of this business segment revenue. Sales on the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter program have increased as we completed the third full year on the SDD contract. During 2004, we initiated a weight reduction effort focusing on the Short Take-Off Vertical Landing (STOVL) variant of the aircraft. Approximately 3,000 pounds were removed from the STOVL design and significant weight-savings were applied to the other two variants. The F/A-22 program has contributed to our sales growth as we continue to build aircraft under low-rate initial production contracts. In 2004, 15 F/A-22s, our highest annual total to date on the program, were delivered including the final six Production Lot 1 aircraft and the first nine Production Lot 2 aircraft. Activities on our F-16 programs increased as we delivered 83 aircraft during 2004 as compared to 62 aircraft in 2003. Activity on the C-130J program included delivery of 13 aircraft in 2004, which represented the near completion of the initial 119 aircraft program and delivery of the first two aircraft under the multi-year award for 60 aircraft that was received in 2003. We began to recognize profits on the 13 C-130J aircraft delivered in 2004. The Electronics Systems business segment has a broad portfolio of products and services. Many of its activities involve a combination of both development and production contracts with varying delivery schedules. The mix of contract types varies, and we expect this to continue in the short term; it may affect the year-to-year comparisons of segment margins and the operating results of the lines of businesses within Electronic Systems. The Space Systems business segment is a key supplier of space solutions, primarily to our U.S. Government customers. Satellites and Strategic & Defensive Missile System activities are expected to experience steady growth. The commercial satellite and launch vehicle industries continue to be very competitive, with resulting pricing pressures. The activities in the Titan launch vehicle program will continue, though at a lower level than prior years, as we work to complete the remaining two U.S. Government missions. The IS&S and I&TS business segments continue to focus their capabilities in providing information technology services to defense, intelligence and other government customers. We expect continued strong growth in providing information technology solutions to government agencies. In the following tables of financial data, the total of the operating results of the business segments is reconciled to the corresponding consolidated amount. With respect to the caption Operating profit, the reconciling item Net unallocated Corporate expense includes the FAS/CAS pension adjustment (see discussion below), earnings and losses from equity investments, interest income, costs for certain stock-based compensation programs, the effects of items not considered part of management evaluation of segment operating performance, and Corporate costs not allocated to the operating segments, as well as other miscellaneous Corporate activities. The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension expense or income calculated for financial reporting purposes in accordance with FAS 87, and pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with U.S. Government CAS, which are reflected in the business segment results. CAS is a major factor in determining our pension funding requirements, and governs the extent of allocability and recoverability of pension costs on government contracts. The CAS expense is recovered through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore recognized in segment net sales. The results of operations of the segments only include pension expense as determined and funded in accordance with CAS rules. 40 This table shows net sales and operating profit of the business segments and reconciles to the consolidated total. (In millions) 2004 2003 2002 Net sales Aeronautics $ 11,781 $ 10,202 $ 6,471 Electronic Systems 9,724 8,991 8,685 Space Systems 6,357 6,021 5,287 Integrated Systems & Solutions 3,850 3,420 3,015 Information & Technology Services 3,801 3,174 3,104 Total business segments 35,513 31,808 26,562 Other 13 16 16 $ 35,526 $ 31,824 $ 26,578 Operating profit Aeronautics $ 899 $ 690 $ 448 Electronic Systems 969 858 875 Space Systems 489 403 279 Integrated Systems & Solutions 334 291 241 Information & Technology Services 285 226 177 Total business segments 2,976 2,468 2,020 Net unallocated Corporate expense (887 ) (449 ) (862 ) $ 2,089 $ 2,019 $ 1,158 Segment Operating Profit (In millions) The following segment discussions also include information relating to negotiated backlog for each segment. Total negotiated backlog was $74 billion at December 31, 2004. This amount included both funded backlog (unfilled firm orders for which funding has been both authorized and appropriated by the customer - Congress in the case of U.S. Government agencies) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding has not yet been appropriated). Negotiated backlog does not include unexercised options or task orders to be issued under indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) type contracts. Funded backlog was approximately $40.2 billion at December 31, 2004. The Aeronautics segment generally includes fewer programs that have much larger sales and operating results than programs included in the other segments. Therefore, due to the large number of comparatively smaller programs in the remaining segments, the discussions of the results of operations of these business segments generally focus on lines of business within the segments rather than on specific programs. The following tables of financial information and related discussions of the results of operations of our business segments are consistent with the presentation of segment information in Note 15 to the financial statements. 41 Aeronautics Aeronautics operating results included the following: (In millions) 2004 2003 2002 Net sales $ 11,781 $ 10,202 $ 6,471 Operating profit 899 690 448 Backlog at year-end 30,489 37,580 35,477 Net sales for Aeronautics increased by 15% in 2004 compared to 2003. The majority of the increase in sales, $1.5 billion, was due to higher volume on the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, F-16 and F/A-22 Combat Aircraft programs. In 2004, 83 F-16s were delivered, 21 more than in 2003. The remaining increase in sales was mainly due to higher C-5 activities in Air Mobility. There were 13 C-130J deliveries in 2004 compared to 15 deliveries in 2003. Net sales for Aeronautics increased by 58% in 2003 compared to 2002 due to growth in Combat Aircraft and Air Mobility. Approximately half the growth in Combat Aircraft was due to higher volume on the F-35 program with a majority of the remaining growth attributable to F-16 programs as a result of increased deliveries. In 2003, 62 F-16s were delivered, 41 more than in 2002. Increased C-130J deliveries contributed $470 million to the year-over-year growth in sales. There were 15 C-130J deliveries in 2003 compared to eight deliveries in 2002. Operating profit for the segment increased by 30% in 2004 compared to 2003. Combat Aircraft operating profit increased $95 million primarily as a result of higher sales volume on the programs discussed above and improved performance on the F/A-22 program. The remaining increase was primarily attributable to $85 million in operating profit recognized on the C-130Js delivered in 2004. The Corporation began recognizing profits on C-130J deliveries in 2004 upon resolution of certain technical aircraft performance risks, manufacturing performance improvements and the achievement of stable production as a result of securing a multi-year contract in 2003. Operating profit for the segment increased by 54% in 2003 compared to the 2002 periods. This increase was primarily due to the impact of the volume increases in Combat Aircraft and performance on other programs. In 2003 and 2002, the C-130J deliveries did not impact operating profit due to the previously disclosed suspension of earnings recognition on the program. Backlog decreased in 2004 as compared to 2003 primarily as a result of sales volume on the F-35 and F-16 programs as well as deliveries of C-130J aircraft. Electronic Systems Electronic Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2004 2003 2002 Net sales $ 9,724 $ 8,991 $ 8,685 Operating profit 969 858 875 Backlog at year-end 18,239 17,339 16,034 Net sales for Electronic Systems increased 8% in 2004 as compared to 2003. The increase in sales was due to higher volume in Maritime Systems & Sensors (MS2) and Missiles & Fire Control (M&FC). Higher volume on surface systems programs accounted for most of MS2 sales growth of $450 million. M&FC sales increased $265 million, primarily due to higher volume on fire control and tactical missile programs. Net sales for Electronic Systems increased 4% in 2003 as compared to 2002. Sales increases in M&FC and MS2 more than offset a decline at Platform, Training & Transportation Systems (PT&TS). Increased volume in air defense and tactical missile programs accounted for the majority of M&FC $250 million sales growth over 2002. In MS2, the $155 million increase in sales was primarily due to higher volume on radar and surface systems programs. The PT&TS decline of $100 million was the result of lower volume on transportation and security system activities. The majority of this decline is attributable to the 2002 rapid deployment of Transportation Security Administration (TSA) programs. Operating profit for the segment increased by 13% in 2004 compared to 2003. Operating profit increased $145 million due to improved performance on tactical missile and fire control programs at M&FC and on radar programs at MS2. The decrease in operating profit at PT&TS was due to a $25 million loss provision recorded in the third quarter of 2004 on certain international simulation and training contracts. 42 Operating profit for the segment decreased by 2% in 2003 compared to 2002. PT&TS operating profit declined by $40 million due to a changing mix of program maturity and initial development activities on platform integration programs, as well as the impact of the decline in volume in transportation and security system activities. These decreases more than offset a $25 million increase in operating profit primarily attributable to higher volume on air defense programs at M&FC. The increase in backlog during 2004 over 2003 resulted from increased orders on development programs. Space Systems Space Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2004 2003 2002 Net sales $ 6,357 $ 6,021 $ 5,287 Operating profit 489 403 279 Backlog at year-end 16,112 12,813 10,701 Net sales for Space Systems increased by 6% in 2004 compared to 2003, as increases in Satellites of $320 million and Strategic & Defensive Missile Systems (S&DMS) of $75 million more than offset a decrease in Launch Services. The increase in Satellites was due to increased volume on government satellite programs and one additional commercial satellite delivery in 2004. In S&DMS, the increase was primarily attributable to fleet ballistic missile programs. The lower volume in Launch Services was mainly due to a decline in the Titan launch vehicle program, which more than offset increases in both Atlas launches (six in 2004 compared to five in 2003) and Proton launches (four in 2004 compared to two in 2003). Net sales for Space Systems increased by 14% in 2003 compared to 2002. Sales increased by $570 million in Satellites and $140 million in S&DMS compared to 2002. The growth in Satellites was due to higher volume on government satellite programs. The growth in S&DMS was attributable to increases in both fleet ballistic missile and missile defense activities. In Launch Services, increased Titan activities offset lower sales resulting from a decline in Proton deliveries (two in 2003 and four in 2002). There were five Atlas launches in both 2003 and 2002. Operating profit for the segment increased 21% in 2004 as compared to 2003. Launch Services operating profit increased $65 million. This increase was primarily due to U.S. Government support of the Atlas program and the benefit resulting from the first quarter termination of a launch vehicle contract by a commercial customer, offset by a decline in activities on the Titan launch vehicle program. Satellites operating profit increased $20 million due to commercial satellite deliveries, partially offset by lower profitability on a government satellite program. In 2003, government satellites operating profit reflected a $30 million charge related to a NASA satellite program. Operating profit for the segment increased 44% in 2003 as compared to 2002. Satellites operating profit increased by $70 million over the 2002 period mainly due to improved performance on commercial satellite activities and volume increases on government satellite programs, including the impact of a $30 million charge recorded in 2003 related to a NASA satellite program. In Launch Services, operating profit increased by $35 million. The increase was primarily due to improved performance and risk retirement activities on the maturing Titan program, which were partially offset by the impact of a decline in Proton launches in 2003. S&DMS operating profit increased by $20 million due to the impact of the volume increases discussed above. The increase in backlog during 2004 as compared to 2003 was mainly due to an increase in orders for government satellites, launch services and missile defense activities. Integrated Systems & Solutions Integrated Systems & Solutions operating results included the following: (In millions) 2004 2003 2002 Net sales $ 3,850 $ 3,420 $ 3,015 Operating profit 334 291 241 Backlog at year-end 4,586 4,350 3,556 Net sales for IS&S increased by 13% in 2004 as compared to 2003 and by 13% for 2003 over 2002. For both comparative periods, the sales increases were primarily attributable to a higher volume of intelligence, defense and information assurance activities. Operating profit for the segment increased 15% in 2004 as compared to 2003 and by 21% for 2003 over 2002. The increases in operating profit for both comparative periods were primarily attributable to higher volume and performance improvements on the activities described above. 43 Information & Technology Services Information & Technology Services operating results included the following: (In millions) 2004 2003 2002 Net sales $ 3,801 $ 3,174 $ 3,104 Operating profit 285 226 177 Backlog at year-end 4,560 4,817 4,617 Net sales for I&TS increased by 20% in 2004 as compared to 2003. The increase in sales was primarily attributable to higher volume of $510 million in Information Technology. Information Technology sales improved due to organic growth, as well as the net impact of our purchase of Affiliated Computer Services federal government IT business and the concurrent sale of our commercial IT business in November 2003. The remaining increase in sales of $120 million was primarily attributable to higher volume in Defense Services, which offset a decline in NASA sales. Net sales for I&TS increased by 2% in 2003 as compared to 2002. The sales increase for the year was mainly the result of volume increases of $110 million in Information Technology, which more than offset lower sales volume totaling $40 million on Defense Services and NASA programs. Information Technology results included the net impact of the previously mentioned transactions with Affiliated Computer Services in 2003. Operating profit for the segment increased by 26% in 2004 as compared to 2003. The operating profit increase was mainly due to Information Technology volume and program performance. Operating profit for the segment increased by 28% in 2003 as compared to 2002. The operating profit increase was mainly due to the higher volume in Information Technology and improved performance across all lines of business. The I&TS segment includes a business unit that provides services to the government of Argentina. At December 31, 2004, we had net investments in and advances to this unit totaling about $20 million. While we expect that these amounts will be recovered, there is always the potential that further devaluation of the Argentine peso, deterioration in the Argentine economy or other factors could adversely affect our ability to recover those amounts. 44 Net Unallocated Corporate (Expense) Income The following table shows the components of net unallocated Corporate (expense) income. For a discussion of the FAS/CAS pension adjustment and other types of items included in net unallocated Corporate (expense) income, see Note 15 to the financial statements. For information about items not considered in segment operating performance, see the table under the previous discussion of results of operations. The decrease in Other, net was primarily due to lower earnings on our equity investments in 2004. (In millions) 2004 2003 2002 FAS/CAS pension adjustment $ (595 ) $ (300 ) $ 243 Items not considered in segment operating performance (215 ) (153 ) (1,112 ) Other, net (77 ) 4 7 $ (887 ) $ (449 ) $ (862 ) The difference between pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS and pension expense determined in accordance with FAS 87 is not included in segment operating results and therefore is a reconciling item between operating profit from the business segments and consolidated operating profit (FAS/CAS pension adjustment). The CAS funding amount is allocated among the business segments and is included as an expense item in the segments cost of goods sold. A majority of the cost is also passed along to our customers through contract pricing, and is consequently included in the segments sales. The following table shows the CAS funding that is included as expense in the segments operating results, the related FAS (expense) income, and the resulting FAS/CAS pension adjustment: (In millions) 2004 2003 2002 FAS 87 (expense) income $ (884 ) $ (484 ) $ 156 Less: CAS expense and funding (289 ) (184 ) (87 ) FAS/CAS pension adjustment (expense) income $ (595 ) $ (300 ) $ 243 As disclosed in Note 12 to the financial statements, FAS 87 expense increased primarily due to higher recognized net actuarial losses and higher service cost in 2004, and due to a lower expected return on plan assets in addition to these other two factors in 2003. Liquidity and Cash Flows Our management has set forth strategic cash deployment objectives to help ensure that we keep a focus toward growing our core business and increasing shareholder value, and that we are in a position to take advantage of opportunities to do so when they arise. Those objectives include internal investment in our business (e.g., capital expenditures, independent research and development), share repurchases, increases in dividends, debt reductions, and selected acquisitions of businesses consistent with our strategy. The following discussion highlights our cash activities over the past three years as well as our future plans. Net Cash Provided By Operating Activities (In millions) 45 Operating Activities Cash from operations continues to be the primary source of funds for financing our activities. Cash from operations amounted to $2.9 billion in 2004, $1.8 billion in 2003 and $2.3 billion in 2002. Our earnings, adjusted for non-cash items such as depreciation and amortization and impairment charges, were the driving force behind these cash flows. Our working capital has continued to be a focus of our cash management processes, particularly with our sales having increased by $11.5 billion over the last three years. We attribute this performance to our continued discipline in managing our cash conversion cycle, including the negotiation of performance-based progress payment or advance payment terms in our contracts, inventory management, and billing and collection activities. We continue to leverage the billing and collection processes of our Shared Services centers, including the emphasis on electronic interfaces with our U. S. Government customers. Cash from operations is net of internal investments we have made in our business relative to independent research and development and bid and proposal activities aggregating $962 million in 2004, $903 million in 2003 and $830 million in 2002. During 2004 and 2003, we made discretionary prepayments of $485 million and $450 million, respectively, to pre-fund our pension plan trusts that reduced cash from operations. Such payments were made to reduce our cash funding requirements in the subsequent year. Our 2002 cash from operations included $117 million from the settlement of a research and development tax credit claim. We expect our cash from operations to continue to be strong over the next two years. Investing Activities Capital expenditures Capital expenditures for property, plant and equipment amounted to $769 million in 2004, $687 million in 2003 and $662 million in 2002. We expect our capital expenditures to increase over the next two years consistent with the expected growth in our business. Acquisitions, divestitures and other activities In addition to our internal investment in capital expenditures and independent research and development activities, we also selectively identify businesses for potential acquisition. During 2004, we paid $91 million for businesses to strengthen our capabilities in providing services to defense and other government customers. During 2003, we paid approximately $645 million for two businesses to strengthen our capabilities in providing IT services to defense, intelligence and other government customers. We also paid $130 million in 2003 related to our guarantee of Space Imaging, LLC borrowings under its credit facility. During the past three years, we have divested non-core businesses, primarily those serving commercial markets. We received cash of approximately $90 million in 2004 from the sale of our COMSAT General business, $110 million in 2003 from the sale of our commercial IT business and $134 million in 2002 from the sale of certain discontinued telecommunication businesses. During 2004, New Skies Satellites, N.V. was sold to a private equity firm. Our portion of the proceeds was $148 million, $140 million of which was received in 2004. In December 2003, Inmarsat Ventures, Ltd., a venture in which we held a 14% interest, was acquired by a consortium of private equity firms in a leveraged buyout transaction. In exchange for our interest, we received cash of $114 million and a 14% ownership interest in the new Inmarsat holding company, Inmarsat Group Holdings, Ltd., valued at $96 million. During 2004, Inmarsat Group Holdings refinanced its debt, and we received cash of $50 million, reducing our investment to $46 million while retaining our 14% ownership interest. In January 2005, the sale of Intelsat, Ltd. to a private equity firm was completed for $18.75 per share. We received proceeds of about $750 million for our 25% ownership of Intelsat. Financing Activities Issuance and repayment of long-term debt Cash provided from operations has been our principal source of funds to reduce our long-term debt. In 2004, we used $1.1 billion of cash for the early retirement and scheduled repayment of long-term debt. We used $163 million of cash for costs associated with the early retirement of $951 million of debt through our tender offers. In 2003, we issued $1.0 billion of floating rate convertible senior debentures that bear interest at three-month LIBOR less 25 basis points, reset quarterly. We used the proceeds of that issuance, along with cash from operations, to repay $2.2 billion of debt in advance of its maturity and retire other high cost debt. We used $175 million of cash for debt issuance and repayment costs to complete those transactions. Share repurchases and dividends We also used cash in each of the last three years for the repurchase of shares of our common stock: $772 million for 14.7 million common shares in 2004, of which $673 million for 12.9 million common shares was settled during the year, $482 million in 2003 for 10.7 million common shares and $50 million in 2002 for 1.0 million common shares. These transactions were pursuant to our share repurchase program initiated in 2002. A total of 16.6 million common shares may be repurchased in the future under the program. 46 The payment of dividends on our common shares is one of the key components of our balanced cash deployment strategy. Shareholders were paid cash dividends of $405 million in 2004, $261 million in 2003 and $199 million in 2002. We have increased our quarterly dividend rate in each of the last two years. We paid a quarterly dividend of $0.22 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2004 and $0.25 per share for the last quarter of 2004. In 2003, we paid quarterly dividends of $0.12 per share during each of the first three quarters of the year and $0.22 for the last quarter of 2003. We plan to continue to deploy a majority of the cash we generate from operations (after capital expenditures) to repurchase shares and pay dividends. Capital Structure and Resources At December 31, 2004, our total long-term debt amounted to $5.1 billion. Our long-term debt is mainly in the form of publicly issued notes and debentures. Our long-term debt bears interest at fixed rates, except for $1.0 billion of convertible debentures issued in 2003 with a floating interest rate based on LIBOR (discussed in more detail below). Through our repayment activities, our long-term debt has declined from a balance of $9.9 billion at December 31, 2000. We improved our debt-to-total capital ratio from 58% at December 31, 2000 to 42% at December 31, 2004. Debt-To-Total Capital Ratio (In percent) Our stockholders equity amounted to $7.0 billion at December 31, 2004, an increase of $265 million from December 31, 2003. The increase resulted from net earnings and stock plan activities partially offset by our payment of dividends, an increase in our minimum pension liability and share repurchase activity. Return on invested capital (ROIC) improved by 120 basis points during 2004 to 11.9%. We define ROIC as net income plus after-tax interest expense divided by average invested capital (stockholders equity plus debt). We believe that reporting ROIC provides investors with greater visibility into how effectively Lockheed Martin uses the capital invested in its operations. We use ROIC to evaluate multi-year investment decisions and as a long-term performance measure. We also plan to use ROIC as a factor in evaluating management performance for incentive compensation purposes in 2005. ROIC is not a measure of financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S., and may not be defined and calculated by other companies in the same manner. ROIC should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net earnings as an indicator of performance. See Consolidated Financial Data - Five Year Summary on page 26 for additional information concerning how we calculate ROIC. In 2004, we repaid a total of $1.1 billion of long-term debt, including scheduled and early debt repayments. Through the completion of tender offers, we repaid debt totaling $951 million: $285 million (73%) of our outstanding 7.70% Notes due June 15, 2008 and $666 million (67%) of our outstanding 8.20% Notes due December 1, 2009. In connection with these early repayments, we recorded charges in 2004, net of state income tax benefits, totaling $154 million. The charges reduced net earnings by $100 million ($0.22 per share). At December 31, 2004, we had in place a $1.5 billion revolving credit facility, which expires in July 2009, and a $500 million revolving credit facility, which expires in July 2005. There were no borrowings outstanding under either facility at December 31, 2004. Borrowings under the credit facility would be unsecured and bear interest at rates based, at our option, on the Eurodollar rate or a defined bank Base Rate. Each bank obligation to make loans under the credit facility is subject to, among other things, our compliance with various representations, warranties and covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets, and a covenant not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio. We have agreements in place with banking institutions to provide for the issuance of commercial paper. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding at December 31, 2004. If we were to issue commercial paper, the borrowings would be supported by the $1.5 billion credit facility. We have an effective shelf registration statement on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission to provide for the issuance of up to $1 billion in debt securities. If we were to issue debt under this shelf registration, we would expect to use the net proceeds for general corporate purposes. These purposes may include repayment of debt, working capital needs, capital expenditures, acquisitions and any other general corporate purpose. We actively seek to finance our business in a manner that preserves financial flexibility while minimizing borrowing costs to the extent practicable. Our management continually reviews changes in financial, market and economic conditions to manage the types, amounts and maturities of our indebtedness. We may at times refinance existing indebtedness, vary our mix of variable-rate and fixed-rate debt, or seek alternative financing sources for our cash and operational needs. Cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash flow from operations and other available financing resources, are expected to be sufficient to meet anticipated operating, capital expenditure and debt service requirements, as well as acquisition and other discretionary investment needs, projected over the next three years. 47 Contractual Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements At December 31, 2004, we had contractual commitments to repay debt, make payments under operating leases, settle obligations related to agreements to purchase goods and services, and settle other long-term liabilities. Capital lease obligations were negligible. Payments due under these long-term obligations and commitments are as follows: Payments Due by Period (In millions) Total Less than 1 year 1 3 years 3 5 years After 5 years Long-term debt (a) $ 5,119 $ 15 $ 269 $ 432 $ 4,403 Operating lease commitments 1,066 251 333 201 281 Purchase obligations 1,541 866 564 111 Other long-term liabilities 1,183 197 271 128 587 Total contractual cash obligations $ 8,909 $ 1,329 $ 1,437 $ 872 $ 5,271 (a) Long-term debt includes scheduled principal payments only. Generally, our long-term debt obligations are subject to, along with other things, compliance with certain covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets. Purchase obligations include agreements and requirements contracts that give the supplier recourse to us for cancellation or nonperformance under the contract or contain terms that would subject us to liquidated damages. Such agreements and contracts may, for example, be related to direct materials, obligations to sub-contractors, outsourcing arrangements, and non-cancelable commitments for property, plant and equipment. Generally, amounts for purchase obligations in the preceding table exclude contractual commitments entered into as a result of contracts we have with our U.S. Government customers. These commitments are excluded because the U.S. Government would be required to pay us for any costs we incur if they terminate our contracts with them for convenience pursuant to FAR. For example, if we had commitments to purchase goods and services that were entered into as a result of a specific contract we received from our U.S. Government customer and the customer terminated the contract for convenience, any amounts we would be required to pay to settle the related commitments, as well as amounts previously incurred, would generally be reimbursed by the customer. This would also be true in cases where we perform sub-contract work for a prime contractor under a U.S. Government contract. The termination for convenience language may also be included in contracts with foreign, state and local governments. If so, amounts related to purchase obligations entered into in support of those contracts were excluded from the preceding table. To the extent contracts with customers do not include termination for convenience provisions, including contracts with commercial customers, related purchase obligation amounts are included in the table. Amounts related to Other long-term liabilities in the preceding table represent the contractual obligations for certain long-term liabilities recorded as of December 31, 2004. Such amounts mainly include expected payments under deferred compensation plans, non-qualified pension plans and environmental liabilities. Obligations related to environmental liabilities represent our estimate of remediation payment obligations under government consent decrees and agreements, excluding amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Government in its capacity as a potentially responsible party under an agreement entered into in 2000. 48 We have entered into standby letter of credit agreements and other arrangements with financial institutions and customers mainly relating to advances received from customers and/or the guarantee of future performance on some of our contracts. At December 31, 2004, we had outstanding letters of credit, surety bonds and guarantees, as follows: Commitment Expiration per Period (In millions) Total Commitment Less than 1 year 1 3 years 3 5 years After 5 years Standby letters of credit (a) $ 2,713 $ 2,385 $ 310 $ 7 $ 11 Surety bonds (a) 328 189 139 Guarantees 4 4 Total commitments $ 3,045 $ 2,578 $ 449 $ 7 $ 11 (a) Approximately $2,245 million and $115 million of standby letters of credit in the less than 1 year and 1 3 year periods, respectively, and approximately $64 million of surety bonds in the less than 1 year period, are expected to renew for additional periods until completion of the contractual obligation. Included in the table above is approximately $420 million representing letter of credit and surety bond amounts for which related obligations or liabilities are also recorded in the balance sheet, either as reductions of inventories, as customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred, or as other liabilities. Approximately $2 billion of the standby letters of credit in the table above were to secure advance payments received under an F-16 contract from an international customer. These letters of credit are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance, and the amount available will be reduced as certain events occur throughout the period of performance in accordance with the contract terms. Similar to the letters of credit for the F-16 contract, other letters of credit and surety bonds are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance. 49 Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure of Market Risk Our main exposure to market risk relates to interest rates and, to a lesser extent, foreign currency exchange rates. Our financial instruments that are subject to interest rate risk principally include fixed-rate and floating rate long-term debt. The estimated fair values of the Corporation long-term debt instruments at December 31, 2004, aggregated approximately $6.3 billion, compared with a carrying amount of approximately $5.1 billion. The majority of our long-term debt obligations are not callable until maturity. We sometimes use interest rate swaps to manage our exposure to fixed and variable interest rates; however, at year-end 2004, we had no such agreements in place. We use forward foreign exchange contracts to manage our exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, and do so in ways that qualify for hedge accounting treatment. These exchange contracts hedge the fluctuations in cash flows associated with firm commitments or specific anticipated transactions contracted in foreign currencies, or hedge the exposure to rate changes affecting foreign currency denominated assets or liabilities. Related gains and losses on these contracts, to the extent they are effective hedges, are recognized in income at the same time as the hedged transaction is recognized or when the hedged asset or liability is adjusted. To the extent the hedges are ineffective, gains and losses on the contracts are recognized currently. At December 31, 2004, the fair value of forward exchange contracts outstanding, as well as the amounts of gains and losses recorded during the year then ended, were not material. We do not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In December 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued FAS 123(R), Share-Based Payments , that, upon implementation, will impact our net earnings and earnings per share, and change the classification of certain elements of the statement of cash flows. FAS 123(R) requires stock options and other share-based payments made to employees to be accounted for as compensation expense and recorded at fair value, and to reflect the related tax benefit received upon exercise of the options in the statement of cash flows as a financing activity inflow rather than an adjustment of operating activity as currently presented. Consistent with the provisions of the new standard, we intend to adopt FAS 123(R) in the third quarter of 2005, and to implement it on a prospective basis. Information about the fair value of stock options under the Black-Scholes model and its pro forma impact on our net earnings and earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2004 can be found in Note 1 to the financial statements, and we expect the impact of implementing the new standard using this model will be a reduction in earnings per share of approximately $0.10 to $0.20 on a full year basis. However, a number of technical implementation issues are yet to be resolved, including the selection and use of an appropriate valuation model, and the ultimate impact of adopting FAS 123(R) is not yet known. In May 2004, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position (FSP) 106-2, Accounting and Disclosure Requirements Related to the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 . This FSP provides specific authoritative guidance on the accounting for the federal subsidy to eligible sponsors of retiree health care benefits provided under this law. Using this guidance, the Corporation calculated a reduction in its accumulated post-retirement benefit obligation at December 31, 2004 of $295 million from the effects of the new law and, after application of government contracting regulations, doesn t anticipate a material impact on net earnings from the reduction in net periodic post-retirement benefits cost in 2005. Controls and Procedures We maintain disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our periodic filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules and forms, and to provide reasonable assurance that assets are safeguarded and transactions are properly executed and recorded. Our disclosure controls and procedures are also designed to ensure that information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO), as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. In designing and evaluating such controls and procedures, we recognize that any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives, and management necessarily is required to use its judgment in evaluating the cost to benefit relationship of possible controls and procedures. Also, we have investments in certain unconsolidated entities. As we do not control or manage these entities, our controls and procedures with respect to those entities are necessarily substantially more limited than those we maintain with respect to our consolidated subsidiaries. We routinely review our system of internal control over financial reporting and make changes to our processes and systems to improve controls and increase efficiency, while ensuring that we maintain an effective internal control environment. Changes may include such activities as implementing new, more efficient systems, consolidating the activities of two or more business units, and migrating certain processes to our Shared Services centers. In addition, when we acquire new businesses, we review the controls and procedures of the acquired business as part of our integration activities. We performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, as of December 31, 2004. The evaluation was performed with the participation of senior management of each business segment and key Corporate functions, and under the supervision of the CEO and CFO. 50 During 2004, we devoted significant effort to comply with the rules on internal control over financial reporting issued pursuant to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. This effort expanded upon our long-standing practice of acknowledging management responsibility for the establishment and effective operation of internal control through performing self-assessment and monitoring procedures. Based on this work and other evaluation procedures, our management, including the CEO and CFO, concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures, including our internal control over financial reporting, were effective as of December 31, 2004. Management report on financial statements and internal control over financial reporting appears on page 51. In addition, both our assessment and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting were audited by our independent auditors. Their unqualified report appears on page 52. There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the most recently completed fiscal quarter that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 
