CIK: 936468
Company Name: LOCKHEED MARTIN CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-02-28


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Financial Section Roadmap The financial section of our Annual Report includes management discussion and analysis, our consolidated financial statements, notes to those financial statements and a five-year summary of financial information. We have prepared the following summary, or roadmap, to assist in your review of the financial section. It is designed to give you an overview of our company and focus your review by directing you to some of the more important activities and events that occurred this year. Lockheed Martin Business Lockheed Martin Corporation principally researches, designs, develops, manufactures, integrates, operates and sustains advanced technology systems, products and services. We mainly serve customers in domestic and international defense, civil agencies, and homeland security. Our sales to agencies of the U.S. Government represented 85% of our sales in 2005. Of the remaining 15% of sales, approximately 13% related to sales to international customers, with the remainder attributable to commercial customers. In 2004 and 2003, sales to agencies of the U.S. Government represented 80% and 78% of our total sales, respectively. Our main areas of focus are in defense, space, intelligence/homeland security, and government information technology. We operate in five principal business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, Space Systems, Integrated Systems & Solutions (IS&S), and Information & Technology Services (I&TS). As a lead systems integrator, our products and services range from electronics and information systems, including integrated net-centric solutions, to missiles, aircraft, spacecraft and launch services. Financial Section Overview The financial section includes the following: Management discussion and analysis, or MD&A (pages 42 through 74) provides management view about industry trends, risks and uncertainties relating to Lockheed Martin, accounting policies that we view as critical in light of our business, our results of operations, including discussions about the key performance drivers of each of our business segments, our financial position and cash flows, commitments and contingencies, important events or transactions that have occurred over the last three years, and forward-looking information, as appropriate. Reports related to the financial statements and internal control over financial reporting (pages 76 through 79) include the following: A report from management, indicating our responsibility for financial reporting, the financial statements, and the system of internal control over financial reporting and an assessment of the effectiveness of those controls; 42 Table of Contents A report from Ernst & Young LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, including their opinions on management assessment of internal control over financial reporting and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting; and A report from Ernst & Young LLP, including their opinion on the fair presentation of our financial statements based on their audits. Financial statements (pages 80 through 83) include our consolidated statements of earnings, cash flows and stockholders equity for each of the last three years, and our balance sheet as of the end of the last two years. Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Notes to the financial statements (pages 84 through 123) provide insight into and are an integral part of our financial statements. The notes contain explanations of our significant accounting policies, details about certain of the captions on the financial statements, information about significant events or transactions that have occurred, discussions about legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies, and selected financial information relating to our business segments. The notes to the financial statements also are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Highlights The financial section of our Annual Report describes our ongoing operations, including discussions about particular lines of business or programs, our ability to finance our operating activities, and trends and uncertainties in our industry and how they might affect our future operations. We also discuss those items affecting our results that were not considered in senior management assessment of the operating performance of our business segments. We separately disclose these items to assist in your evaluation of our overall operating performance and financial condition of the consolidated company. We would like to draw your attention to the following items disclosed in this financial section and where you will find them: Topic Location(s) Critical accounting policies: Contract accounting/revenue recognition Postretirement benefit plans Environmental matters Discussion of business segments Page 49 and page 87 Page 52 and page 106 Page 54, page 86 and page 115 Page 58 and page 116 Liquidity and cash flows Page 66 and page 82 Capital structure and resources Page 68, page 81, page 83 and page 102 Legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies Page 70 and page 113 Stock-based compensation Page 72, page 89 and page 103 Industry Considerations Department of Defense Business Customer requirements for defense and related advanced technology systems for 2006 and beyond will continue to be affected by the global war on terrorism through the continued need for military missions and reconstruction efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan and the related fiscal consequences of war. The war on terrorism has focused greater attention on the security of our 43 Table of Contents homeland and better communication and interoperability between law enforcement, civil government agencies, intelligence agencies and our military services. At the same time, our nation overall defense posture continues to move toward a more joint-capabilities-based structure, which creates the ability for a more flexible response with greater force mobility, stronger space capabilities, enhanced missile defense and improved information systems capabilities and security. The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) recently completed the Congressionally mandated 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR). The QDR continues and accelerates the DoD prior commitment to a transformation of the military to focus more on the needs of its combatant commanders and to develop portfolios of joint capabilities rather than stove-piped programs. This movement towards horizontally-integrated structures is expected to become an organizing principle for the DoD in making investment decisions for future systems. We formed the Integrated Systems & Solutions business segment in 2003 to help us better focus our integrated solutions capabilities across the Corporation and enhance our ability to serve as a lead partner with the DoD. In 2005, we opened our Center for Innovation, a state-of-the-art facility for modeling and simulating our net-centric solutions for our customers. The President budget proposal for fiscal year 2007 and beyond presents a framework to reduce the federal budget deficit while prosecuting the global war on terrorism. The DoD budget is growing, but at lower levels than in the past few years, in order to continue the modernization and recapitalization that began earlier this decade. The budget for the Department of Homeland Security is increasing, while spending across other non-defense federal agencies is anticipated to decline through 2011. These changes in the President budget plan reflect a commitment to a 50% reduction in the federal budget deficit by 2009, and the sentiment expressed by the Federal Reserve that sustained federal deficits could hamper economic growth. The President budget proposal includes $439 billion for the DoD, including $84 billion for procurement of systems and $73 billion for research and development. Transformation of the DoD enterprise and accompanying budget pressures also may create additional opportunities for supply chain logistics, business process management and outsourcing of service functions by the military services, expanding the scope of private sector contracting opportunities at the DoD. The Fiscal Year 2007-2011 Future Years Defense Plan (FYDP) projects sustained growth in the DoD top line budget, rising from $439 billion in 2007 to $502 billion in 2011. These estimates do not include any allowance to fund ongoing military operations in Iraq, Afghanistan and the global war on terrorism, which are expected to be addressed through annual supplemental appropriations as required. The DoD continued emphasis on systems modernization is reflected in the proposed growth in the FYDP for Procurement, which is estimated to increase from $84 billion in 2007 to $118 billion in 2011. Research, Development, Test and Engineering (RDT&E) spending will remain roughly the same during this period, ranging from $73 billion in 2007 to $75 billion in 2009, declining then to $71 billion in 2011. While subject to change in future specific budget submissions and annual appropriation by Congress, these estimates continue the Administration long stated intent to modernize the Armed Forces while prosecuting the war on terrorism. The differing trends in Procurement and RDT&E budgets reflect the maturation of programs emerging from RDT&E funding into procurement, such as the F-35 program. 44 Table of Contents In the past two years, Congress provided for supplemental appropriations to defray costs for Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. Approximately $50 billion has already been provided relative to 2006 and another $70 billion has been requested. These supplemental appropriations have enabled the DoD to proceed on critical modernization and acquisition programs, versus using amounts available for those programs to pay for the Iraq and Afghanistan missions. While there is no assurance that additional supplemental appropriations will be approved by Congress, we do not believe that sustained operations in Iraq and Afghanistan will materially impact the procurement and research and development budget in the near term. We believe that our broad mix of programs and capabilities positions us favorably to support the future needs of the various agencies of the U.S. Government in defense and information technology. Our major programs and capabilities include: missile defense; space intelligence; command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C4ISR); air mobility aircraft; and air-power projection/precision-strike capability. In terms of size and long-term potential impact, two of our more significant programs are the F-22 Raptor and the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter. The Air Force approved the F-22 for full rate production, declared initial operational capability and rated the F-22 mission capable based on successful completion of operational testing. The DoD plans to continue production of the F-22 through 2011 to coincide with the anticipated production of the F-35 to avoid a gap in 5 TH Generation fighter stealth and advanced avionics capabilities. While the ultimate number of F-35s to be produced will continue to be subject to debate, the QDR and budget indicate support for the program. We are also represented in almost every aspect of land, sea, air and space-based missile defense, including the AEGIS Weapon System program, the Medium Extended Air Defense System (MEADS), the Patriot Advanced Capability (PAC-3) missile program, the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system, and the Multiple Kill Vehicle program. In the areas of space intelligence and information superiority, we have leadership positions on programs such as the TSAT Mission Operations System (TMOS), Mobile User Objective System (MUOS), the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) system, and the Space-Based Infrared System-High (SBIRS-H), and in classified programs and battle management command and control capabilities. In airlift, we have the C-130J program and are under contract to upgrade the C-5 strategic airlift aircraft. Many of the aforementioned programs require funding over several budget cycles. There is always an inherent risk that these and other large, highly visible programs which are subject to annual appropriation by Congress could become potential targets for future reductions or elimination of funding to pay for other programs. We continually explore opportunities to expand into adjacent product lines utilizing our existing advanced technology products and services, and have been successful in doing so through such programs as the Littoral Combat Ship and Marine One U.S. Presidential Helicopter programs. We also are continuing to pursue opportunities to expand our sustainment and logistical support activities to enhance the longevity of the systems procured by our customers. In addition, we have focused our efforts on select acquisitions, cost savings and improving efficiency. Through these activities, we have been able to pass along savings to our customers, mainly the U.S. Government. 45 Table of Contents Non-Department of Defense Business We provide products and services to a number of government agencies other than the DoD, including the Departments of Homeland Security, Justice, Commerce, Health and Human Services and Energy, the U.S. Postal Service, the Social Security Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Library of Congress. Although our lines of business addressing civil government needs are not dependent on defense budgets, they share many of the same risks as our defense businesses, as well as other risks unique to the particular programs. For example, although indemnification by the U.S. Government to cover potential claims or liabilities resulting from a failure of technologies developed and deployed may be available in some instances for our defense businesses, U.S. Government indemnification may not be available for homeland security purposes. While we maintain insurance for some business risks, it is not possible to obtain coverage to protect against all operational risks and liabilities. We do plan to seek, and in certain cases have obtained, limitation of such potential liabilities related to the sale and use of our homeland security products and services through qualification by the Department of Homeland Security under the SAFETY Act provisions of the Homeland Security Act of 2002. In the event we were to provide homeland security-related products and services to a customer without such qualification, we would not be afforded the benefit of the SAFETY Act cap on tort liability or U.S. Government indemnification. In addition, our information technology products and services related to Homeland Security may raise potential liabilities associated with privacy issues for which neither indemnification nor SAFETY Act coverage is available. Other risks unique to civil government programs may include development of competing products, technological feasibility and product obsolescence. We have continued to expand our capabilities in critical intelligence, knowledge management and E-Government solutions for our customers, including the Social Security Administration and the EPA, as well for the DoD. We also provide program management, business strategy and consulting, complex systems development and maintenance, complete life-cycle software support, information assurance and enterprise solutions. Consistent with the President agenda, the expected growth in business process outsourcing has been enabled by rule changes for public/private competitions. Such a competition led to the selection in 2005 of Lockheed Martin to operate the Federal Aviation Administration Automated Flight Services Station Network. In addition, recent trends continue to indicate an increase in demand by federal and civil government agencies for upgrading and investing in new information technology systems and solutions. As a result, we continue to focus our resources in support of infrastructure modernization that allows for interoperability and communication across agencies. In addition, the increase in emphasis on homeland security may increase demand for our capabilities in areas such as air traffic management, ports and waterways security, biohazard detection systems for postal equipment, information systems security and other global security systems solutions. We provide products and services to NASA, including the Space Shuttle program, mainly through our Space Systems and Information & Technology Services business segments. We also have a 50% equity interest in United Space Alliance, LLC which provides ground processing and 46 Table of Contents other operational services to the Space Shuttle program. We expect to compete for NASA programs related to the next generation manned space exploration program. Non-U.S. defense budgets have generally been flat or declining over the past decade. As a result, consolidation has been occurring in the European aerospace industry, resulting in fewer but larger and more capable competitors. Space Business Sales of commercial launch vehicles and satellites continues to be very competitive due mainly to low demand for new satellites as a result of excess capacity in the telecommunications industry. The reduction in demand has resulted in pricing pressures for both launch vehicles and satellites. Despite this environment, we did receive new orders for commercial satellites and launch vehicles in both 2004 and 2005. For a discussion of the results of operations of our Space Systems segment, see the Discussion of Business Segments section. The above factors have impacted orders for the Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV or Atlas V), our next generation launch vehicle program in which we have made significant investments over the past few years. The Atlas V is available for both commercial and U.S. Government use. This program has required investment of funds for research and development, start-up and other nonrecurring costs, and launch facilities. Some of these expenditures have been funded under an agreement with the U.S. Government. We have received a total of 19 launch assignments from the U.S. Government, nine of which are under contract and in backlog. The 19 launch assignments include seven that were reassigned in 2003 from the original EELV competition (referred to as Buy 1 ) as a result of our competitor violation of the Procurement Integrity Act. Two of the seven launch reassignments were for West Coast launches and, since then, the Air Force has assigned us four additional West Coast launches. To prepare for these, we upgraded our West Coast launch facilities, which required further investment in the EELV program (see Note 5 to the financial statements). We expect to recover the investment through the pricing of the West Coast launches. The U.S. Government has been awarding launch missions incrementally as it continues to develop its acquisition strategy for future national missions. The U.S. Government plans to maintain assured access to space to the maximum extent possible and has recognized the need to fund additional EELV infrastructure costs created by the weaker-than-originally-anticipated commercial demand for launch services. We had three Atlas launches in 2005, including our fifth Atlas V commercial launch. As of year-end 2005, the Atlas family of launch vehicles had a record of 77 consecutive successful launches. Commercial orders and prices for the Atlas V launch vehicle to date have been lower than we originally expected during the development phase of the vehicle. In 2005, we entered into an agreement with Boeing to create a joint venture that would combine the production, engineering, test and launch operations associated with U.S. Government launches of our Atlas launch vehicles and Boeing Delta launch vehicles. The joint venture, named United Launch Alliance, LLC (ULA), is structured as a 50-50 joint venture and would be accounted for as an equity investment. Under the terms of the joint venture, Atlas and Delta expendable launch vehicles would continue to be available as alternatives on 47 Table of Contents individual launch missions. The agreement also stipulates that, upon closing of the transaction, Lockheed Martin and Boeing will dismiss all claims against each other in the pending civil litigation related to a previous competition for launches under the Air Force EELV program (see Note 15 for a discussion of that litigation). The closing of the ULA transaction is subject to conditions to closing, including government and regulatory approvals and agreements in the United States and internationally. On August 9, 2005, the European Commission determined that ULA was compatible with European Union merger control regulation. On October 24, 2005, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) requested additional information from Lockheed Martin and Boeing related to ULA in response to the pre-merger notice under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 (HSR) submitted by the parties. The FTC second request extends the period that the FTC is permitted to review the transaction under the HSR Act. We currently plan to close the ULA transaction as soon as practicable following satisfaction of all the closing conditions. We do not expect that its formation will have a significant impact on our results of operations or financial position for 2006. If the conditions to closing are not satisfied and the ULA transaction is not consummated by March 31, 2006, either Boeing or Lockheed Martin may terminate the joint venture agreement. Lockheed-Khrunichev-Energia International, Inc. (LKEI), a joint venture we have with two Russian government-owned space firms, has exclusive rights to market launches of commercial, non-Russian-origin space payloads on the Proton family of rockets from a launch site in Kazakhstan. One of the joint venture partners, Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center (Khrunichev), is the manufacturer of the Proton launch vehicle and provider of the related launch services in Russia. Commercial Atlas and Proton launch services are marketed around the world through International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and LKEI. We consolidate the results of operations of LKEI and ILS into our financial statements based on our controlling financial interest. We received four new awards for launches on Proton vehicles in 2005. Contracts for launch services usually require substantial advances from the customer prior to launch. At the end of 2005, $315 million of advances received from customers for Proton launch services not yet provided was included as a liability in our balance sheet in customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred. A sizeable percentage of the advances we receive from customers for Proton launch services are sent to Khrunichev. If a contracted launch service is not provided, a sizeable percentage of the related advance would have to be refunded to our customer. At year-end 2005, payments to Khrunichev included in inventories for launches under contract totaled $190 million. Our ability to recover these advances may be affected by Khrunichev ability to provide the launch services, as well as economic conditions and the political environment in Russia. Through the end of 2005, launch services through LKEI and ILS have been provided according to contract terms. The Corporation has entered into an agreement with RD AMROSS, a joint venture of the Pratt & Whitney division of United Technologies Corporation and the Russian firm NPO Energomash, for the purchase, subject to certain conditions, of RD-180 booster engines for use in the Corporation Atlas launch vehicles. Terms of the agreement call for payments to be made to RD AMROSS upon the achievement of certain milestones in the manufacturing process. Payments of $70 million made under this agreement for engines not yet delivered were included in the Corporation inventories at December 31, 2005. 48 Table of Contents As discussed above, commercial satellite sales have continued to experience pricing pressures due to excess capacity. However, in the past two years, we have received six commercial satellite orders and are in active discussions for additional satellite orders. In addition to commercial activity, we also received new orders for government satellites in 2004 and 2005, including those under the MUOS program and certain classified activities. Other Business Considerations As a government contractor, we are subject to U.S. Government oversight. The government may ask about and investigate our business practices and audit our compliance with applicable rules and regulations. Depending on the results of those audits and investigations, the government could make claims against us. Under government procurement regulations and practices, an indictment of a government contractor could result in that contractor being fined and suspended from being able to bid on, or be awarded, new government contracts for a period of time. A conviction could result in debarment for a specific period of time. Similar government oversight exists in most other countries where we conduct business. Although we cannot predict the outcome of these types of investigations and inquiries with certainty, based on current facts, we do not believe that any of the claims, audits or investigations pending against us are likely to have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. We are exposed to risks associated with U.S. Government contracting, including technological uncertainties, dependence on fewer manufacturing suppliers and obsolescence, as well as Congressional appropriation and allotment of funds each year. Many of our programs involve the development and application of state-of-the-art technologies aimed at achieving challenging goals. As a result, setbacks, delays, cost growth and product failures can occur. We have entered into various joint venture, teaming and other business arrangements to help support our portfolio of products and services in many of our lines of business. Some of these business arrangements include foreign partners. The conduct of international business introduces other risks into our operations, including changing economic conditions, fluctuations in relative currency values, regulation by foreign countries and the potential for unanticipated cost increases resulting from the possible deterioration of political relations. The nature of our international business also makes us subject to the export control regulations of the U.S. Department of State and the Department of Commerce. If these regulations are violated, it could result in monetary penalties and denial of export privileges. We are currently unaware of any violations of export control regulations which are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. Critical Accounting Policies Contract Accounting / Revenue Recognition A large part of our business is derived from long-term contracts for design, development and production activities which we account for consistent with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) audit and accounting guide, Audits of Federal Government 49 Table of Contents Contractors, and the AICPA Statement of Position 81-1, Accounting for Performance of Construction-Type and Certain Production-Type Contracts . We also enter into contracts to provide other services that are not associated with design, development or production activities. We account for those contracts in accordance with the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) No. 104, Revenue Recognition , and other relevant revenue recognition accounting literature. We consider the nature of these contracts and the types of products and services provided when we determine the proper accounting method for a particular contract. Accounting for Design, Development and Production Contracts Generally, we record long-term, fixed-price design, development and production contracts on a percentage of completion basis using units-of-delivery as the basis to measure progress toward completing the contract and recognizing sales. For example, we use this method of revenue recognition on our C-130J tactical transport aircraft program, Atlas and Proton launch vehicle programs, and Multiple Launch Rocket System program. For certain other long-term, fixed-price development and production contracts that, along with other factors, require us to deliver minimal quantities over a longer period of time or to perform a substantial level of development effort in comparison to the total value of the contract, sales are recorded when we achieve performance milestones or using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress toward completion. Under the cost-to-cost method of accounting, we recognize sales based on the ratio of costs incurred to our estimate of total costs at completion. As examples, we use this methodology for our F-22 Raptor program and the AEGIS Weapon System program. In some instances, long-term production programs may require a significant level of development and/or a low level of initial production units in their early phases, but will ultimately require delivery of increased quantities in later, full rate production stages. In those cases, the revenue recognition methodology may change from the cost-to-cost method to the units-of-delivery method after considering, among other factors, program and production stability. As we incur costs under cost-reimbursement-type contracts, we record sales. Cost-reimbursement-type contracts include time and materials and other level-of-effort-type contracts. Examples of this type of revenue recognition include the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter system development and demonstration (SDD) program and the THAAD missile defense program. Most of our long-term contracts are denominated in U.S. dollars, including contracts for sales of military products and services to foreign governments conducted through the U.S. Government ( i.e., foreign military sales). As a general rule, we recognize sales and profits earlier in a production cycle when we use the cost-to-cost and milestone methods of percentage of completion accounting than when we use the units-of-delivery method. In addition, our profits and margins may vary materially depending on the types of long-term contracts undertaken, the costs incurred in their performance, the achievement of other performance objectives, and the stage of performance at which the right to receive fees, particularly under incentive and award fee contracts, is finally determined. Incentives and award fees related to performance on design, development and production contracts, which are generally awarded at the discretion of the customer, as well as penalties related to contract performance, are considered in estimating sales and profit rates. Estimates of award fees are based on actual awards and anticipated performance. Incentive provisions which increase or decrease earnings based solely on a single significant event are generally not 50 Table of Contents recognized until the event occurs. Such incentives and penalties are recorded when there is sufficient information for us to assess anticipated performance. Accounting for design, development and production contracts requires judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract revenues and costs, and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. Due to the size and nature of the work required to be performed on many of our contracts, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. Contract costs include material, labor and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs. Assumptions have to be made regarding labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the availability of materials, the length of time to complete the contract (to estimate increases in wages and prices for materials), and the availability and timing of funding from the customer. For contract change orders, claims or similar items, we apply judgment in estimating the amounts and assessing the potential for realization. These amounts are only included in contract value when they can be reliably estimated and realization is considered probable. We have accounting policies in place to address these as well as other contractual and business arrangements to properly account for long-term contracts. Products and services provided under long-term design, development and production contracts make up the majority of our business. Therefore, the amounts we record in our financial statements using contract accounting methods and cost accounting standards are material. Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. For example, if underlying assumptions were to change such that our estimated profit at completion for all design, development and production contracts was higher or lower by 1%, our net earnings would increase or decrease by approximately $190 million. When adjustments in estimated contract revenues or costs are required, any changes from prior estimates are included in earnings in the current period. Accounting for Other Services Contracts Revenue under contracts for services other than those associated with design, development or production activities is generally recognized either as services are performed or when earned, depending on the contract. This methodology is mainly used by our Information & Technology Services segment. Services contracts primarily include operations and maintenance contracts, and outsourcing-type arrangements. Revenue under such contracts is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the period of contract performance, unless evidence suggests that the revenue is earned or the obligations are fulfilled in a different pattern. Costs incurred under these services contracts are expensed as incurred, except that initial set-up costs are capitalized and recognized over the life of the agreement. Operating profit related to such services contracts may fluctuate from period to period, particularly in the earlier phases of the contract. Incentives and award fees related to performance on services contracts are recognized when they are fixed and determinable, generally at the date of award. Other Contract Accounting Considerations The majority of our sales are driven by pricing based on costs incurred to produce products or perform services under contracts with the U.S. Government. Cost-based pricing is determined under the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR). The FAR provides guidance on the types of 51 Table of Contents costs that are allowable in establishing prices for goods and services under U.S. Government contracts. For example, costs such as those related to charitable contributions, advertising, interest expense, and public relations are unallowable, and therefore not recoverable through sales. In addition, we may enter into agreements with the U.S. Government that address the subjects of allowability and allocability of costs to contracts for specific matters. For example, most of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation related to discontinued operations and sites operated in prior years are allocated to our current operations as general and administrative costs under agreements reached with the U.S. Government. We closely monitor compliance with and the consistent application of our critical accounting policies related to contract accounting. Business segment personnel assess the status of contracts through periodic contract status and performance reviews. Also, regular and recurring evaluations of contract cost, scheduling and technical matters are performed by management personnel independent from the business segment performing work under the contract. Costs incurred and allocated to contracts with the U.S. Government are reviewed for compliance with regulatory standards by our personnel, and are subject to audit by the Defense Contract Audit Agency. For other information on accounting policies we have in place for recognizing sales and profits, see our discussion under Sales and earnings in Note 1 to the financial statements. Postretirement Benefit Plans Most employees are covered by defined benefit pension plans (pension plans), and we provide health care and life insurance benefits to eligible retirees. Our earnings may be negatively or positively impacted by the amount of expense or income we record for our employee benefit plans. This is particularly true with expense or income for pension plans because those calculations are sensitive to changes in several key economic assumptions and workforce demographics. Effective January 1, 2006, new non-union represented employees that we hire are not being covered by defined benefit pension plans, but are eligible to participate in defined contribution plans. We currently plan to offer those employees the ability to participate in our retiree medical plans, but will not subsidize the cost of their participation effective January 1, 2006. We account for our pension plans using Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (FAS) 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions. Those rules require that the amounts we record, including the expense or income for the plans, be computed using actuarial valuations. These valuations include many assumptions, including assumptions we make relating to financial market and other economic conditions. Changes in key economic indicators can result in changes in the assumptions we use. The key year-end assumptions used to estimate pension expense or income for the following calendar year are the discount rate, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and the rates of increase in future compensation levels. We use judgment in reassessing these assumptions each year because we have to consider current market conditions and, in the case of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, past investment experience, judgments about future market trends, changes in interest rates and equity market performance. We also have to consider factors like the timing and amounts of expected contributions to the plans and benefit payments to plan participants. An example of how changes in these assumptions can affect our financial statements occurred in 2005. We reassess our pension plan assumptions each year. Based on our review of 52 Table of Contents interest rates at the end of the year, we lowered our discount rate assumption to 5.625% at December 31, 2005, compared to 5.75% used at the end of 2004. Before the end of 2005, we also performed a study of the rates of increase in future compensation levels. The results of that study indicated that it would be appropriate to reduce that rate from 5.50% to 5.0% at the end of 2005. These changes, together with other factors such as the effects of the actual return on plan assets over the past few years, resulted in our projecting that the amount of pension expense for 2006 will decrease by approximately 15% to 20% as compared to 2005 expense. The primary drivers of this projected decrease were the change in the rate of future compensation increases as well as the growth in plan assets over the past year, including contributions we made to the pension trust. The decrease of 50 basis points in the compensation rate decreased the estimated 2006 expense by approximately $100 million. In addition, the higher asset base at the beginning of 2006 drove a higher expected return on assets for 2006, which was the main component of the remaining decrease in the expense. This decrease was partially offset by an increase of approximately $50 million in the estimated 2006 pension expense, resulting from the 12.5 basis point decrease in the discount rate assumption. The annual review of our pension plan assumptions also affects the pension liability recorded in our balance sheet. At the end of each of the last few years, we have recorded noncash after-tax adjustments in the stockholders equity section of our balance sheet to reflect a minimum pension liability for many of our pension plans. These adjustments were calculated on a plan-by-plan basis, and were determined by comparing the accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) for each plan to the fair value of that plan assets. The amount by which the ABO exceeds the fair value of the plan assets, after adjusting for previously recorded accrued or prepaid pension cost for the plan, must be recorded as a minimum pension liability, with a corresponding increase in an intangible asset, if appropriate, and a reduction to stockholders equity. In 2005, the minimum pension liability adjustment we recorded reduced stockholders equity by $105 million primarily due to minimum pension liabilities associated with nonqualified benefit plans and the changes in assumptions. At the end of 2004, the adjustment reduced stockholders equity by $285 million, mainly driven by the change in the discount rate. These adjustments did not impact earnings. The accumulated minimum pension liability balances in stockholders equity at the end of 2005 and 2004 were $(1,629) million and $(1,524) million, respectively. The amount of the minimum pension liability is computed at each year-end and could decrease or increase depending on changes in interest rates and other factors. U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS) are a major factor in determining our pension funding requirements and govern the extent to which our pension costs are allocable to and recoverable under contracts with the U.S. Government. Funded amounts are recovered over time through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore are recognized in our net sales. The total funding requirement for pension plans under CAS in 2005 was $498 million. For 2006, we expect our funding requirements under CAS to increase. Also in 2006, funding in addition to the amount calculated under CAS will likely be required under Internal Revenue Code rules. Any additional amounts computed under those rules are considered to be prepayments under the CAS rules, and are recorded on our balance sheet and recovered in future periods. In 2005 and 2004, we made discretionary prepayments of $980 million and $485 million, respectively, to the pension trust. Prepayments reduce the amount of future cash funding that will be required. Accordingly, although our CAS funding requirements are expected to increase over the $498 million required in 2005, we expect our cash contributions to the pension plans to be $100 million to $110 million, primarily reflecting the additional funding required under Internal Revenue Code rules. 53 Table of Contents The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension expense calculated in accordance with FAS 87 and pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS. Since the CAS expense is recovered through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore recognized in a particular segment net sales, the results of operations of our segments only include pension expense as determined and funded in accordance with CAS rules. Accordingly, the FAS/CAS adjustment is an amount included in the reconciliation of total segment operating profit to consolidated operating profit under GAAP. See the discussion of Net Unallocated Corporate (Expense) Income under Discussion of Business Segments. In response to the public concern over the adequacy of pension plan funding, Congress has been drafting legislation to address the amount of annual contributions that companies are required to pay into their pension funds. Both the Senate and the House of Representatives have passed their own versions of a pension funding bill and those bills are expected to go to conference during the latter part of the first quarter of 2006. It is expected that the conference process will produce compromises and changes in the Senate and House bills, and ultimate passage of a bill is uncertain. This uncertainty makes it difficult to quantify the potential impact to our pension funding. Generally, the Senate and House bills, as drafted, would accelerate the required amount of our annual pension plan contributions, which may have a material impact on our cash flows for a few years beginning in 2007. Absent other changes, the subsequent annual funding requirements would be expected to decline in recognition of the accelerated contributions. Environmental Matters We are a party to various agreements, proceedings and potential proceedings for environmental cleanup issues, including matters at various sites where we have been designated a potentially responsible party (PRP) by the EPA or by a state agency. We record financial statement accruals for environmental matters in the period that it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred and the amounts can be reasonably estimated (see the discussion under Environmental matters in Note 1 to the financial statements). Judgment is required when we develop assumptions and estimate costs expected to be incurred for environmental remediation activities due to, along with other factors, difficulties in assessing the extent of environmental remediation to be performed, complex environmental regulations and remediation technologies, cost allowability issues and agreements between PRPs to share in the cost of remediation as discussed below. We enter into agreements ( e.g., administrative orders, consent decrees) which document the extent and timing of our obligation. We are also involved in remediation activities at environmental sites where formal agreements exist but do not quantify the extent and timing of our obligation. Environmental cleanup activities usually cover several years, which makes estimating the costs more judgmental due to, for example, changing remediation technologies. To determine the costs related to cleanup sites, we have to assess the extent of contamination, the appropriate technology to be used to accomplish the remediation and continually evolving regulatory environmental standards. We consider these factors in our estimates of the timing and amount of any future costs that may be required for remediation actions. In cases where a date to complete activities at a particular environmental site cannot be estimated by reference to agreements or otherwise, we project costs over an appropriate time frame not to exceed 20 years. 54 Table of Contents Given the level of judgment and estimation which has to occur, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if different assumptions were used or if circumstances were to change ( e.g., a change in environmental standards). If we are ultimately found to have liability at those sites where we have been designated a PRP, we expect that the actual costs of remediation will be shared with other liable PRPs. Generally, PRPs that are ultimately determined to be responsible parties are strictly liable for site cleanup and usually agree among themselves to share, on an allocated basis, the costs and expenses for investigation and remediation of hazardous materials. Under existing environmental laws, responsible parties are jointly and severally liable and, therefore, we are potentially liable for the full cost of funding such remediation. In the unlikely event that we were required to fund the entire cost of such remediation, the statutory framework provides that we may pursue rights of contribution from the other PRPs. The amounts we record do not reflect the fact that we may recover some of the environmental costs we have incurred through insurance or from other PRPs, which we are required to pursue by agreement and U.S. Government regulation. Under agreements reached with the U.S. Government, some of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation are allocated to our operations as general and administrative costs. Under existing government regulations, these and other environmental expenditures relating to our U.S. Government business, after deducting any recoveries received from insurance or other PRPs, are allowable in establishing prices of our products and services. As a result, a substantial amount of the expenditures we incur are being included in our sales and cost of sales according to U.S. Government agreement or regulation. At the end of 2005, the total amount of liabilities recorded on our balance sheet for environmental matters was $464 million. About 60% of the liability relates to sites in Redlands, Burbank and Glendale, California, and in Great Neck, New York, mainly for remediation of soil and groundwater contamination. The remainder of the liability relates to other properties (including current operating facilities and certain facilities operated in prior years) for which our obligation is probable and the financial exposure can be estimated. We have recorded assets totaling $353 million at December 31, 2005 for the portion of environmental costs that are probable of future recovery in pricing of our products and services for U.S. Government businesses. The amount that is expected to be allocated to our commercial businesses has been expensed through cost of sales. Any recoveries we receive from other PRPs or insurance would reduce the allocated amounts included in our future U.S. Government sales and cost of sales. Acquisition and Divestiture Activities We continuously strive to strengthen our portfolio of products and services to meet the current and future needs of our customers. We accomplish this not only internally, through our independent research and development activities, but also through acquisitions. We selectively pursue the acquisition of businesses and investments that complement our current portfolio and allow expansion into adjacent product lines or access to new technologies. We have made a number of such niche acquisitions of businesses during the past several years. Over the last five years, we have completed 10 such acquisitions for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $1.5 billion. Conversely, we may also explore the sale of businesses, investments and surplus real estate. If we were to decide to sell any such businesses or real estate, the resulting gains, if any, would be recorded when the transactions are consummated and losses, if any, would be recorded when the value of the related asset is determined to be impaired. 55 Table of Contents Acquisitions In 2005, we completed the purchase of The SYTEX Group, Inc. (SYTEX). The total purchase price, including transaction-related costs, was approximately $480 million. Approximately $380 million of the purchase price was paid in cash at closing, with most of the remainder payable in 2006. The acquisition was accounted for under the purchase method of accounting. Purchase accounting adjustments were recorded by allocating the purchase price to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values, and included recording goodwill of $395 million, of which $360 million will be amortized for tax purposes. The acquisition expands the Corporation information technology solutions and technical support services businesses with the DoD and other federal agencies. The operations of SYTEX are included in the Information & Technology Services business segment. In 2005, we also completed the acquisitions of STASYS Limited, a U.K.-based technology and consulting firm specializing in network communications and defense interoperability; INSYS Group Limited, a U.K.-based diversified supplier of military communications systems, weapons systems and advanced analysis services; and Coherent Technologies, Inc., a U.S.-based supplier of high-performance, laser-based remote sensing systems. The aggregate cash purchase price for these three acquisitions was $180 million. Purchase accounting adjustments included recording combined goodwill of $164 million. These acquisitions were not material to our consolidated results of operations for 2005. In January 2006, we acquired Aspen Systems Corporation, a U.S.-based company that provides a range of business process and technology solutions primarily to civil agencies of the U.S. Government. This acquisition is not expected to have a material impact on consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. Divestitures During 2005 and 2004, we continued to execute the strategy to monetize certain of our equity investments, as follows: In January 2005, we completed the sale of our 25% interest in Intelsat, Ltd. to a private equity firm for $18.75 per share, or $752 million in total proceeds. The transaction resulted in the recording of a gain, net of state income taxes, of $47 million in other income and expenses, and an increase in net earnings of $31 million ($0.07 per share). In June 2005, Inmarsat plc (Inmarsat), a company in which we held a 14% interest, completed an initial public offering (IPO) of 150 million of its ordinary shares on the London Stock Exchange. The IPO had the effect of diluting our ownership to 8.9% and was the primary driver for our recognition of a $42 million deferred gain that was recorded in 2003 related to this investment. In October 2005, we sold approximately 16 million of our Inmarsat shares for $89 million, further reducing our ownership percentage to 5.3%. These transactions resulted in the recording of gains, net of state income taxes, totaling $126 million in other income and expenses, and an increase in net earnings of $82 million ($0.18 per share). At December 31, 2005, we held 24 million shares of Inmarsat with a total market value of $146 million. In January 2006, we sold an additional 12 million shares of Inmarsat for $75 million. The gain is expected to increase 2006 net earnings by $47 million ($0.11 per share). 56 Table of Contents In the fourth quarter of 2005, we completed the sale of our interest in NeuStar, Inc. The transaction resulted in the recording of a gain, net of state income taxes, of $30 million in other income and expenses, and an increase in net earnings of $19 million ($0.04 per share). In November 2004, a private equity firm purchased the outstanding shares of New Skies Satellites, N.V. (New Skies). We sold our shares for $148 million. The transaction resulted in the recording of a gain, net of state income taxes, of $91 million in other income and expenses, and an increase in net earnings of $59 million ($0.13 per share). The carrying value of our investment in New Skies was marked to market through other comprehensive income prior to the sale. Results of Operations Since our operating cycle is long-term and involves many types of development and production contracts with varying production delivery schedules, the results of operations of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of recorded sales and profits, may not be indicative of future operating results. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context. All per share amounts cited in this discussion are presented on a per diluted share basis. Net Sales (In billions) The following discussion of net sales and operating results provides an overview of our operations by focusing on key elements set forth in our statement of earnings. The Discussion of Business Segments which follows, describes the contributions of each of our business segments to our consolidated sales and operating profit for 2005, 2004 and 2003. We follow an integrated approach for managing the performance of our businesses and generally focus the discussion of our results of operations around major lines of business, versus distinguishing between products and services. As mentioned previously, most of our services revenues are generated in our Information & Technology Services segment. For 2005, net sales were $37.2 billion, a 5% increase over 2004 sales. Sales for 2004 were $35.5 billion, an increase of 12% compared to 2003. Sales, as compared to the prior year, increased in all segments except Aeronautics in 2005, where there was a slight decline due to an anticipated reduction in combat aircraft deliveries. The U.S. Government is our largest customer, accounting for about 85% of our sales for 2005, compared to 80% in 2004 and 78% in 2003. Other income and expense, net was $449 million for 2005 compared to $121 million in 2004. This was due to an increase in investment income, gains from the sale of investments (primarily Intelsat and Inmarsat) and charges in 2004 for the early retirement of debt. Other income and expenses, net increased $78 million from 2003 to 2004 due to gains from the sale of the COMSAT General business and the investment in New Skies. 57 Table of Contents Our operating profit for 2005 was $3.0 billion, an increase of 43% compared to 2004. Our operating profit for 2004 was $2.1 billion, an increase of 3% compared to 2003. Interest expense for 2005 was $370 million, $55 million lower than in 2004. Interest expense for 2004 was $425 million, $62 million lower than the amount for 2003. The decrease in interest expense was due to reductions in our debt outstanding. Our effective tax rates were 30.2% for 2005, 23.9% for 2004, and 31.3% for 2003. For each of the three years, our tax rate was reduced from the statutory rate by the tax benefits related to export sales and tax deductible dividends. For 2005, our tax rate was reduced by the new tax deduction for sales of products manufactured in the U.S. For 2004, our tax rate reflected a $144 million reduction in our income tax expense primarily resulting from the closure of an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) examination. Net earnings increased as compared to the prior year for the fourth straight year. We reported net earnings of $1.8 billion ($4.10 per share) in 2005, compared to net earnings of $1.3 billion ($2.83 per share) in 2004 and earnings of $1.1 billion ($2.34 per share) in 2003. Discussion of Business Segments We operate in five business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, Space Systems, Integrated Systems & Solutions (IS&S), and Information & Technology Services (I&TS). In the Aeronautics business segment, sales have leveled compared to the growth that had been experienced the last few years. This is largely due to lower sales on Combat Aircraft programs driven by declines in F-16 volume, completion of initial ramp-up activities associated with F-35 development and F-22 production, and the completion of the F-22 Engineering and Manufacturing Development (EMD) phase of the program. The number of F-16 deliveries is expected to continue to decline over the next few years; however, with the Greek Government contract authorization for 30 aircraft, firm production is currently planned through 2009. During 2005, 23 F-22s were delivered and the program achieved initial operational capability, indicating its readiness for service. The Lot 5 contract for the production of 24 aircraft is expected to continue production of the F-22 into 2008, and we received advanced procurement contracts for production of Lots 6 and 7 associated with long lead activities. The initial F-35 test aircraft is being readied for its first flight and significant progress is being made on the carrier-based and short takeoff variants as well. Activity on the C-130J program included 15 aircraft deliveries in 2005. Through 2005, we have delivered 16 of the 60 aircraft under the multi-year award, and production and delivery of the remaining multi-year aircraft are expected to continue into 2009. The Electronic Systems business segment has a broad portfolio of products and services. Many of its activities involve a combination of both development and production contracts with varying delivery schedules. This business segment has continued to expand its core competencies as a leading systems integrator, as demonstrated with its role as the prime contractor on the Presidential Helicopter and Littoral Combat Ship programs. The Space Systems business segment is a key supplier of space solutions, primarily to our U.S. Government customers. Growth will depend on our government satellite business and our ability to capture market share. The commercial satellite and launch vehicle industries continue 58 Table of Contents to be very competitive, with resulting pricing pressures. During 2005, the final Titan IV was launched and we now plan to continue to provide launch services to our U.S. Government customers with our Atlas V vehicle through the EELV program. The IS&S and I&TS business segments continue to focus their capabilities in providing information technology services to defense, intelligence and other government customers. We expect continued strong growth in providing information technology solutions to government agencies. In the following table of financial data, total operating profit of the business segments is reconciled to the corresponding consolidated amount. The reconciling item Net unallocated Corporate expense includes the FAS/CAS pension adjustment (see discussion below), earnings and losses from equity investments, interest income, costs for certain stock-based compensation programs, the effects of items not considered part of management evaluation of segment operating performance, and Corporate costs not allocated to the operating segments, as well as other miscellaneous Corporate activities. The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension expense or income calculated for financial reporting purposes in accordance with FAS 87, and pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with U.S. Government CAS, which are reflected in the business segment results. CAS is a major factor in determining our pension funding requirements, and governs the extent of allocability and recoverability of pension costs on government contracts. The CAS expense is recovered through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore recognized in segment net sales. The results of operations of the segments only include pension expense as determined and funded in accordance with CAS rules. This table shows net sales and operating profit of the business segments and reconciles to the consolidated total. (In millions) 2005 2004 2003 Net Sales Aeronautics $ 11,672 $ 11,785 $ 10,206 Electronic Systems 10,580 9,729 8,996 Space Systems 6,820 6,359 6,024 Integrated Systems & Solutions 4,131 3,851 3,422 Information & Technology Services 4,010 3,802 3,176 $ 37,213 $ 35,526 $ 31,824 Operating profit Aeronautics $ 994 $ 899 $ 690 Electronic Systems 1,113 969 858 Space Systems 609 489 403 Integrated Systems & Solutions 365 334 291 Information & Technology Services 351 285 226 Total business segments 3,432 2,976 2,468 Net unallocated Corporate expense (446 ) (887 ) (449 ) $ 2,986 $ 2,089 $ 2,019 59 Table of Contents The following segment discussions also include information relating to negotiated backlog for each segment. Total negotiated backlog was approximately $75 billion and $74 billion at December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. This amount included both funded backlog (unfilled firm orders for which funding has been both authorized and appropriated by the customer Congress in the case of U.S. Government agencies) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding has not yet been appropriated). Negotiated backlog does not include unexercised options or task orders to be issued under indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) contracts. Funded backlog was approximately $35 billion at December 31, 2005. The Aeronautics segment generally includes fewer programs that have much larger sales and operating results than programs included in the other segments. Therefore, due to the large number of comparatively smaller programs in the remaining segments, the discussions of the results of operations of these business segments generally focus on lines of business within the segments rather than on specific programs. The following tables of financial information and related discussions of the results of operations of our business segments are consistent with the presentation of segment information in Note 16 to the financial statements. Segment Operating Profit (In millions) Aeronautics Aeronautics operating results included the following: (In millions) 2005 2004 2003 Net sales $ 11,672 $ 11,785 $ 10,206 Operating profit 994 899 690 Backlog at year-end 29,580 30,489 37,580 Net sales for Aeronautics decreased by $113 million, or 1%, in 2005 compared to 2004. The decrease was mainly due to anticipated declines in Combat Aircraft, which were partially offset by growth in Air Mobility. Combat Aircraft sales decreased by $480 million for the year primarily due to declines in F-16 volume, which more than offset higher F-35 and F-22 volume. The sales growth in Air Mobility was due to additional C-130J deliveries (15 in 2005 compared to 13 in 2004) and higher volume on other Air Mobility programs. Net sales for Aeronautics increased by 15% in 2004 compared to 2003. The majority of the increase in sales, $1.5 billion, was due to higher volume on the F-35, F-16 and F-22 Combat Aircraft programs. In 2004, 83 F-16s were delivered, 21 more than in 2003. The remaining 60 Table of Contents increase in sales was mainly due to higher C-5 activities in Air Mobility. There were 13 C-130J deliveries in 2004 compared to 15 deliveries in 2003. Operating profit for the segment increased by 11% in 2005 compared to 2004. The increase was due to higher Air Mobility operating profit that exceeded a decline in Combat Aircraft operating profit. Air Mobility operating profit increased $100 million mainly due to improved performance and increased deliveries on the C-130J program. Combat Aircraft operating profit declined due to decreased F-16 deliveries (69 in 2005 compared to 83 in 2004) and reduced earnings on the F-35 development program, which more than offset increased volume and improved performance on the F-22 program. Operating profit for the segment increased by 30% in 2004 compared to 2003. Combat Aircraft operating profit increased $95 million primarily as a result of higher sales volume on the programs discussed above and improved performance on the F-22 program. The remaining increase was primarily attributable to $85 million in operating profit recognized on the C-130Js delivered in 2004. The Corporation began recognizing profits on C-130J deliveries in 2004 upon resolution of certain technical aircraft performance risks, manufacturing performance improvements and the achievement of stable production as a result of securing a multi-year contract in 2003. Backlog decreased in 2005 as compared to 2004 primarily as a result of sales volume on the F-35 and F-16 programs as well as deliveries of C-130J aircraft. Electronic Systems Electronic Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2005 2004 2003 Net sales $ 10,580 $ 9,729 $ 8,996 Operating profit 1,113 969 858 Backlog at year-end 19,932 18,239 17,339 Net sales for Electronic Systems increased 9% in 2005 as compared to 2004. Higher volume in tactical and surface systems programs contributed to increased sales of $495 million at Maritime Systems & Sensors (MS2). Platform, Training & Transportation Solutions (PT&TS) sales increased $310 million primarily due to platform integration activities. Air defense and fire control programs contributed to increased sales of $40 million at Missiles & Fire Control (M&FC). Net sales for Electronic Systems increased 8% in 2004 as compared to 2003. The increase in sales was due to higher volume in MS2 and M&FC. Higher volume on surface systems programs accounted for most of MS2 sales growth of $450 million. M&FC sales increased $265 million, primarily due to higher volume on fire control and tactical missile programs. Operating profit for the segment increased by 15% in 2005 compared to 2004. Operating profit increased by $80 million at M&FC mainly due to improved performance on fire control and air defense programs. Performance on surface systems programs contributed to an increase 61 Table of Contents in operating profit of $50 million at MS2. PT&TS operating profit increased $10 million primarily due to improved performance on simulation and training programs. Operating profit for the segment increased by 13% in 2004 compared to 2003. Operating profit increased $145 million due to improved performance on tactical missile and fire control programs at M&FC and on radar programs at MS2. The decrease in operating profit at PT&TS was due to a $25 million loss provision recorded in the third quarter of 2004 on certain international simulation and training contracts. The increase in backlog during 2005 over 2004 resulted from increased orders on development programs. Space Systems Space Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2005 2004 2003 Net sales $ 6,820 $ 6,359 $ 6,024 Operating profit 609 489 403 Backlog at year-end 15,925 16,112 12,813 Net sales for Space Systems increased by 7% in 2005 compared to 2004. During the year, sales growth in Satellites and Strategic & Defensive Missile Systems (S&DMS) offset declines in Launch Services. The $410 million increase in Satellites sales was due to higher volume on government satellite programs that more than offset declines in commercial satellite activities. There were no commercial satellite deliveries in 2005, compared to four in 2004. Increased sales of $235 million in S&DMS were attributable to the fleet ballistic missile and missile defense programs. The $180 million decrease in Launch Services sales was mainly due to having three Atlas launches in 2005 compared to six in 2004. Net sales for Space Systems increased by 6% in 2004 compared to 2003, as increases in Satellites of $320 million and S&DMS of $75 million more than offset a $55 million decrease in Launch Services. The increase in Satellites was due to increased volume on government satellite programs and one additional commercial satellite delivery in 2004. In S&DMS, the increase was primarily attributable to fleet ballistic missile programs. The lower volume in Launch Services was mainly due to a decline in the Titan launch vehicle program, which more than offset increases in both Atlas launches (six in 2004 compared to five in 2003) and Proton launches (four in 2004 compared to two in 2003). Operating profit for the segment increased 25% in 2005 compared to 2004. Operating profit increased in Launch Services, S&DMS and Satellites. In Launch Services, the $60 million increase in operating profit was primarily attributable to improved performance on the Atlas vehicle program. Satellites operating profit increased $35 million due to the higher volume and improved performance on government satellite programs, which more than offset the decreased operating profit due to the decline in commercial satellite deliveries. The $20 million increase in S&DMS was attributable to higher volume on fleet ballistic missile and missile defense programs. 62 Table of Contents Operating profit for the segment increased 21% in 2004 as compared to 2003. Launch Services operating profit increased $65 million. This increase was primarily due to U.S. Government support of the Atlas program and the benefit resulting from the first quarter termination of a launch vehicle contract by a commercial customer, offset by a decline in activities on the Titan launch vehicle program. Satellites operating profit increased $20 million due to commercial satellite deliveries, partially offset by lower profitability on a government satellite program. In 2003, government satellites operating profit reflected a $30 million charge related to a NASA satellite program. The decrease in backlog during 2005 as compared to 2004 was mainly due to sales related to government satellite programs. Integrated Systems & Solutions Integrated Systems & Solutions operating results included the following: (In millions) 2005 2004 2003 Net sales $ 4,131 $ 3,851 $ 3,422 Operating profit 365 334 291 Backlog at year-end 3,974 4,586 4,350 Net sales for IS&S increased by 7% in 2005 as compared to 2004 and by 13% in 2004 as compared to 2003. For both comparative periods, the sales increases were primarily attributable to a higher volume of intelligence, defense and information assurance activities. Operating profit for the segment increased 9% in 2005 as compared to 2004 and by 15% in 2004 as compared to 2003. The increases in operating profit for both comparative periods were primarily attributable to higher volume and performance improvements on the activities described above. The decrease in backlog during 2005 compared to 2004 was due to the U.S. Army termination for convenience of the Aerial Common Sensor contract. Information & Technology Services Information & Technology Services operating results included the following: (In millions) 2005 2004 2003 Net sales $ 4,010 $ 3,802 $ 3,176 Operating profit 351 285 226 Backlog at year-end 5,414 4,560 4,817 Net sales for I&TS increased by 5% in 2005 as compared to 2004. The increase in sales was primarily attributable to higher volumes of $460 million in Information Technology and Defense Services, which more than offset a sales decline of $250 million in NASA programs. 63 Table of Contents Information Technology sales increase includes the impact of organic growth and the purchase of SYTEX in March 2005. Net sales for I&TS increased by 20% in 2004 as compared to 2003. The increase in sales was primarily attributable to higher volume of $510 million in Information Technology. Information Technology sales improved due to organic growth, as well as the net impact of our purchase of Affiliated Computer Services federal government IT business and the concurrent sale of our commercial IT business in November 2003. The remaining increase in sales of $120 million was primarily attributable to higher volume in Defense Services, which offset a decline in NASA sales. Operating profit for the segment increased by 23% in 2005 as compared to 2004. The operating profit increase was mainly due to higher volume and improved performance in Information Technology and Defense Services. Operating profit for the segment increased by 26% in 2004 as compared to 2003. The operating profit increase was mainly due to Information Technology volume and program performance. The increase in backlog was attributable to growth in our Information Technology line of business. Unallocated Corporate (Expense) Income, Net The following table shows the components of net unallocated Corporate (expense) income. (In millions) 2005 2004 2003 FAS/CAS pension adjustment $ (626 ) $ (595 ) $ (300 ) Items not considered in segment operating performance 173 (215 ) (153 ) Other, net 7 (77 ) 4 $ (446 ) $ (887 ) $ (449 ) The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS and pension expense determined in accordance with FAS 87. That difference is not included in segment operating results and therefore is a reconciling item between operating profit from the business segments and consolidated operating profit. The CAS funding amount is allocated among the business segments and is included as an expense item in the segments cost of goods sold. A majority of the cost is also passed along to our customers through contract pricing, and is consequently included in the segments sales. 64 Table of Contents The following table shows the CAS funding that is included as expense in the segments operating results, the related FAS (expense) income, and the resulting FAS/CAS pension adjustment: (In millions) 2005 2004 2003 FAS 87 expense $ (1,124 ) $ (884 ) $ (484 ) Less: CAS expense and funding (498 ) (289 ) (184 ) FAS/CAS pension adjustment expense $ (626 ) $ (595 ) $ (300 ) As disclosed in Note 13 to the financial statements, FAS 87 expense increased primarily due to higher recognized net actuarial losses and higher service cost in 2005, and due to a lower expected return on plan assets in addition to these other two factors in 2004. Certain items are excluded from segment results as part of senior management evaluation of segment operating performance consistent with the management approach promulgated by FAS 131, Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information . For example, gains and losses related to the disposition of businesses or investments managed by Corporate, as well as other Corporate activities such as charges recorded related to the early repayment of debt, are not considered by management in evaluating the operating performance of business segments. Therefore, for purposes of segment reporting, the following items were included in Unallocated Corporate (expense) income, net for 2005, 2004 and 2003: (In millions, except per share data) Operating Profit (Loss) Net Earnings (Loss) Earnings (Loss) Per Share Year ended December 31, 2005 Gains related to Inmarsat transactions $ 126 $ 82 $ 0.18 Gain on sale of interest in Intelsat 47 31 0.07 Gain on sale of interest in NeuStar 30 19 0.04 Impairment charge related to a satellite (30 ) (19 ) (0.04 ) $ 173 $ 113 $ 0.25 Year ended December 31, 2004 Charge for Pit 9 litigation $ (180 ) $ (117 ) $ (0.26 ) Charge for early retirement of debt (154 ) (100 ) (0.22 ) Gain on sale of interest in New Skies 91 59 0.13 Gain on sale of COMSAT General business 28 4 0.01 Benefit from closure of an IRS examination 144 0.32 $ (215 ) $ (10 ) $ (0.02 ) Year ended December 31, 2003 Charge for early retirement of debt $ (146 ) $ (96 ) $ (0.21 ) Charge related to exit from the commercial mail sorting business (41 ) (27 ) (0.06 ) Gain on partial reversal of Space Imaging charge 19 13 0.03 Gain on sale of the commercial IT business 15 8 0.02 $ (153 ) $ (102 ) $ (0.22 ) 65 Table of Contents The increase in the Other, net component of unallocated Corporate (expense) income, net of $84 million from 2004 to 2005 was primarily due to higher interest income due to a larger invested cash balance and higher interest rates in 2005. The decrease of $81 million from 2003 to 2004 was primarily due to lower earnings on our equity investments in 2004. Liquidity and Cash Flows We have a balanced cash deployment and disciplined growth strategy to enhance our businesses, increase shareholder value and position ourselves to take advantage of new business opportunities when they arise. Consistent with that strategy, we have invested in our business ( e.g., capital expenditures, independent research and development), repurchased shares, increased our dividends, opportunistically reduced our debt and made select acquisitions of businesses. The following provides an overview of our execution of this strategy. Net Cash Provided By Operating Activities (In millions) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $270 million to $3.2 billion in 2005 as compared to 2004 after having increased by $1.1 billion to $2.9 billion in 2004 as compared to 2003. In 2005, the increase was primarily attributable to an increase in net earnings of $559 million as compared to 2004, which more than offset a $386 million reduction in working capital improvements between the years. In 2004, the increase was attributable to an increase in net earnings of $213 million, and also to an increase in working capital improvements of $799 million compared to 2003. The remaining increase in cash between the periods was due to the timing of income tax payments and various other operating activities. The focus on improving our cash management processes continues to contribute to the aggregate reduction in operating working capital accounts (receivables, inventories, accounts payable, and customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred), including an aggregate reduction of $106 million in 2005 as compared to a reduction of $492 million in 2004. Although we will continue to focus on management of operating working capital accounts, we do not expect the rate of improvements we have experienced in prior periods to continue. Investing Activities Capital expenditures Capital expenditures for property, plant and equipment amounted to $865 million in 2005, $769 million in 2004 and $687 million in 2003. We expect our capital expenditures to increase over the next two years consistent with the expected growth in our business and to support specific program requirements. 66 Table of Contents Acquisitions, divestitures and other activities We have a process to selectively identify businesses for acquisition that meet our financial targets and disciplined growth strategy. We have focused on government information technology providers, systems integrators and complementary technologies. We paid $564 million for four businesses in 2005, $91 million for two businesses in 2004 and $645 million for two businesses in 2003. During 2005, we received proceeds of $935 million from the divestiture of non-core equity investments. The proceeds included $752 million from the sale of our investment in Intelsat, Ltd., $140 million from the sale of Inmarsat shares and the redemption of certain Inmarsat equity-related investments, and $33 million from the sale of our NeuStar investment. During 2004, New Skies Satellites, N.V. was sold to a private equity firm. Our portion of the proceeds was $148 million, $140 million of which was received in 2004. Also during 2004, we received cash from Inmarsat Group Holdings, Ltd. amounting to $50 million which reduced the amount of our investment. In 2003, Inmarsat Ventures, Ltd. was acquired by a consortium of private equity firms in a leveraged buyout transaction. In exchange for our interest, we received cash of $114 million and retained an ownership interest in the new Inmarsat holding company, Inmarsat Group Holdings, Ltd., valued at $96 million. Also in 2003, we paid $130 million related to our guarantee of Space Imaging, LLC borrowings under its credit facility. Financing Activities Issuance and repayment of long-term debt Cash provided from operations has been our principal source of funds to reduce our long-term debt. In 2005, we used $133 million of cash for the early retirement and scheduled repayment of long-term debt. In 2004, we used $1.1 billion of cash for the early retirement and scheduled repayment of long-term debt. Of that amount, $951 million related to the early retirement of debt through tender offers for which we incurred $163 million of associated costs. In 2003, we issued $1.0 billion of floating rate convertible senior debentures that bear interest at three-month LIBOR less 25 basis points, reset quarterly. We used the proceeds of that issuance, along with cash from operations, to repay $2.2 billion of debt in advance of its maturity and retire other high cost debt. We used $175 million of cash for debt issuance and repayment costs to complete those transactions in 2003. Share repurchases and dividends We also used cash in each of the last three years for common share repurchase activity as follows: $1,222 million for 19.7 million common shares in 2005, of which $1,211 million for 19.5 million of those common shares, as well as $99 million for 1.8 million common shares purchased in 2004, was settled during the year; $772 million for 14.7 million common shares in 2004, of which $673 million for 12.9 million common shares was settled during the year; and $482 million in 2003 for 10.7 million common shares. These purchases were made under a share repurchase program in place for the repurchase of up to 88 million shares of our common stock from time-to-time at management discretion, including 45 million shares that were authorized for repurchase under the program in September 2005. As of December 31, 2005, we had repurchased a total of 46.1 million shares under the program, and there remained approximately 41.9 million shares that may be repurchased in the future. The payment of dividends on our common shares is one of the key components of our balanced cash deployment strategy. Shareholders were paid cash dividends of $462 million in 2005, $405 million in 2004 and $261 million in 2003. We have increased our quarterly 67 Table of Contents dividend rate in each of the last three years. We paid a quarterly dividend of $0.25 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2005 and $0.30 per share for the last quarter of 2005. We paid a quarterly dividend of $0.22 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2004 and $0.25 per share for the last quarter of 2004. In 2003, we paid quarterly dividends of $0.12 per share during each of the first three quarters of the year and $0.22 per share for the last quarter of 2003. Capital Structure and Resources At December 31, 2005 our total long-term debt amounted to $5.0 billion. Our long-term debt is almost entirely in the form of publicly issued notes and debentures. The majority of our long-term debt bears interest at fixed rates; however, $1.0 billion of convertible debentures issued in 2003 have a floating interest rate based on LIBOR. In 2005, we repaid $133 million of long-term debt, including scheduled and early debt repayments. Through our repayment activities, our long-term debt balance has declined over the last five years from $9.9 billion at December 31, 2000. We improved our debt-to-total capitalization ratio from 58% at December 31, 2000 to 39% at December 31, 2005. Debt-To-Total Capital Ratio Our stockholders equity amounted to $7.9 billion at December 31, 2005, an increase of $846 million from December 31, 2004. The increase came from net earnings and stock plan activities partially offset by our share repurchases and payment of dividends. Return on invested capital (ROIC) improved by 370 basis points during 2005 to 14.5%. We define ROIC as net income plus after-tax interest expense divided by average invested capital (stockholders equity plus debt), after adjusting stockholder equity by adding back our minimum pension liability balance. We believe that reporting ROIC provides investors with greater visibility into how effectively Lockheed Martin uses the capital invested in its operations. We use ROIC to evaluate multi-year investment decisions and as a long-term performance measure. We also use ROIC as a factor in evaluating management performance under certain of our incentive compensation plans. The adjustment to add back the minimum pension liability is a revision to our calculation in 2005 which we believe more closely links ROIC to management performance. ROIC is not a measure of financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S., and may not be defined and calculated by other companies in the same manner. ROIC should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net earnings as an indicator of performance. See Note (f) to the Consolidated Financial Data Five Year Summary on page 41 of this Form 10-K for additional information concerning how we calculate ROIC. That information reflects the revision to the calculation as discussed in the preceding paragraph for all periods presented. 68 Table of Contents Revised Return On Invested Capital Ratio (1) (1) Calculation was revised in 2005. See Note (f) to the Consolidated Financial Summary Five Year Summary on page 41 for additional information on the calculation. At December 31, 2005, we had in place a $1.5 billion revolving credit facility which expires in July 2010. There were no borrowings outstanding under the facility at December 31, 2005. Borrowings under the credit facility would be unsecured and bear interest at rates based, at our option, on the Eurodollar rate or a bank Base Rate (as defined). Each bank obligation to make loans under the credit facility is subject to, among other things, our compliance with various representations, warranties and covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets, and a covenant not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio. We cancelled our $500 million 364-day credit facility on June 17, 2005. We have agreements in place with banking institutions to provide for the issuance of commercial paper. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding at December 31, 2005. If we were to issue commercial paper, the borrowings would be supported by the $1.5 billion credit facility. We have an effective shelf registration statement on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission to provide for the issuance of up to $1 billion in debt securities. If we were to issue debt under this shelf registration, we would expect to use the net proceeds for general corporate purposes. These purposes may include repayment of debt, working capital needs, capital expenditures, acquisitions and any other general corporate purpose. We actively seek to finance our business in a manner that preserves financial flexibility while minimizing borrowing costs to the extent practicable. Our management continually reviews changes in financial, market and economic conditions to manage the types, amounts and maturities of our indebtedness. We may at times refinance existing indebtedness, vary our mix of variable-rate and fixed-rate debt, or seek alternative financing sources for our cash and operational needs. Cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash flow from operations and other available financing resources are expected to be sufficient to meet anticipated operating, capital expenditure and debt service requirements, as well as acquisition and other discretionary investment needs, projected over the next three years. 69 Table of Contents Contractual Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements At December 31, 2005, we had contractual commitments to repay debt, make payments under operating leases, settle obligations related to agreements to purchase goods and services, and settle other long-term liabilities. Capital lease obligations were negligible. Payments due under these long-term obligations and commitments are as follows: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term debt (a) $ 4,986 $ 202 $ 136 $ 248 $ 4,400 Operating lease obligations 1,157 261 386 262 248 Purchase obligations Operating activities 23,566 11,001 7,880 2,752 1,933 Capital expenditures 462 344 118 Other long-term liabilities 1,289 213 256 169 651 Total contractual cash obligations $ 31,460 $ 12,021 $ 8,776 $ 3,431 $ 7,232 (a) Long-term debt includes scheduled principal payments only. Generally, our long-term debt obligations are subject to, along with other things, compliance with certain covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets. Purchase obligations related to operating activities include agreements and requirements contracts that give the supplier recourse to us for cancellation or nonperformance under the contract or contain terms that would subject us to liquidated damages. Such agreements and contracts may, for example, be related to direct materials, obligations to sub-contractors and outsourcing arrangements. Total purchase obligations in the preceding table include approximately $22 billion related to contractual commitments entered into as a result of contracts we have with our U.S. Government customers. However, the U.S. Government would generally be required to pay us for any costs we incur relative to these commitments if they were to terminate the related contracts for convenience pursuant to FAR. For example, if we had commitments to purchase goods and services that were entered into as a result of a specific contract we received from our U.S. Government customer and the customer terminated the contract for convenience, any amounts we would be required to pay to settle the related commitments, as well as amounts previously incurred, would generally be reimbursed by the customer. This would also be true in cases where we perform sub-contract work for a prime contractor under a U.S. Government contract. The termination for convenience language may also be included in contracts with foreign, state and local governments. In addition, we have contracts with customers that do not include termination for convenience provisions, including contracts with commercial customers. Total purchase obligations in the preceding table related to capital expenditures generally include amounts for facilities and equipment at various of our locations, related to customer contracts. 70 Table of Contents Amounts related to Other long-term liabilities in the preceding table represent the contractual obligations for certain long-term liabilities recorded as of December 31, 2005. Such amounts mainly include expected payments under deferred compensation plans, non-qualified pension plans and environmental liabilities. Obligations related to environmental liabilities represent our estimate of remediation payment obligations under government consent decrees and agreements, excluding amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Government in its capacity as a potentially responsible party under an agreement entered into in 2000. We also may enter into industrial participation agreements, sometimes referred to as offset agreements, as a condition to obtaining orders for our products and services from certain customers in foreign countries. These agreements are designed to enhance the social and economic environment of the foreign country by requiring the contractor to promote investment in the country. Offset agreements may be satisfied through activities that do not require us to use cash, including transferring technology, providing manufacturing and other consulting support to in-country projects, and the purchase by third parties ( e.g., our vendors) of supplies from in-country vendors. These agreements may also be satisfied through our use of cash for such activities as purchasing supplies from in-country vendors, providing financial support for in-country projects, and building or leasing facilities for in-country operations. We do not commit to offset agreements until orders for our products or services are definitive. Offset programs generally extend over several years and may provide for penalties in the event we fail to perform in accordance with offset requirements. No such penalties have been incurred during the last five years. The amounts ultimately applied against our offset agreements are based on negotiations with the customer and generally require cash outlays that represent only a fraction of the original amount in the offset agreement. At December 31, 2005, we had outstanding offset agreements totaling $8.4 billion, primarily related to our Aeronautics segment, that extend through 2015. To the extent we have entered into purchase obligations at December 31, 2005 that also satisfy offset agreements, those amounts are included in the preceding table. We have entered into standby letter of credit agreements and other arrangements with financial institutions and customers mainly relating to advances received from customers and/or the guarantee of future performance on some of our contracts. At December 31, 2005, we had outstanding letters of credit, surety bonds and guarantees, as follows: Commitment Expiration By Period (In millions) Total Commitment Less Than 1 Year (a) 1-3 Years (a) 3-5 Years After 5 Years Standby letters of credit $ 2,630 $ 2,425 $ 171 $ 18 $ 16 Surety bonds 434 79 352 3 Guarantees 2 1 1 Total commitments $ 3,066 $ 2,505 $ 524 $ 21 $ 16 (a) Approximately $2,262 million and $49 million of standby letters of credit in the Less Than 1 Year and 1-3 Year periods, respectively, and approximately $38 million of surety bonds in the Less Than 1 Year period, are expected to renew for additional periods until completion of the contractual obligation. Included in the table above is approximately $200 million representing letter of credit and surety bond amounts for which related obligations or liabilities are also recorded in the balance sheet, either as reductions of inventories, as customer advances and amounts in excess of costs 71 Table of Contents incurred, or as other liabilities. Approximately $2 billion of the standby letters of credit in the table above were to secure advance payments received under an F-16 contract from an international customer. These letters of credit are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance, and the amount available will be reduced as certain events occur throughout the period of performance in accordance with the contract terms. Similar to the letters of credit for the F-16 contract, other letters of credit and surety bonds are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance. At December 31, 2005, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as those arrangements are defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure of Market Risk Our main exposure to market risk relates to interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. Our financial instruments that are subject to interest rate risk principally include fixed-rate and floating rate long-term debt. If interest rates were to change by plus or minus 1%, interest expense would increase or decrease by approximately $10 million related to our floating rate debt. The estimated fair values of the Corporation long-term debt instruments at December 31, 2005 aggregated approximately $6.2 billion, compared with a carrying amount of approximately $5.0 billion. The majority of our long-term debt obligations are not callable until maturity. We have used interest rate swaps in the past to manage our exposure to fixed and variable interest rates; however, at year-end 2005, we had no such agreements in place. We use forward foreign exchange contracts to manage our exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, and do so in ways that qualify for hedge accounting treatment. These exchange contracts hedge the fluctuations in cash flows associated with firm commitments or specific anticipated transactions contracted in foreign currencies, or hedge the exposure to rate changes affecting foreign currency denominated assets or liabilities. Related gains and losses on these contracts, to the extent they are effective hedges, are recognized in income at the same time the hedged transaction is recognized or when the hedged asset or liability is adjusted. To the extent the hedges are ineffective, gains and losses on the contracts are recognized in the current period. At December 31, 2005, the fair value of forward exchange contracts outstanding, as well as the amounts of gains and losses recorded during the year then ended, were not material. We do not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In December 2004, the FASB issued FAS 123(R), Share-Based Payments , which will impact our net earnings and earnings per share and change the classification of certain elements of the statement of cash flows. FAS 123(R) requires stock options and other share-based payments made to employees to be accounted for as compensation expense and recorded at fair value, and to reflect the related excess tax benefit received upon exercise of the options, if any, in the statement of cash flows as a financing activity inflow rather than an adjustment of operating activity as currently presented. We currently use the Black-Scholes model to compute the fair value of our stock options in connection with our disclosure of the pro forma effects on net earnings and earnings per share as if compensation cost had been recognized for such options at the date of grant (see Note 1 to the financial statements). 72 Table of Contents We adopted FAS 123(R), and related SEC rules included in SAB No. 107, on a modified prospective basis effective January 1, 2006. We will continue to use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock options granted subsequent to the date of adoption. The Lockheed Martin Amended and Restated 2003 Incentive Performance Award Plan provides for the grant of various types of stock-based incentive awards, including options to purchase common stock, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock and stock units. The types and mix of stock-based incentive awards are evaluated on an ongoing basis and may vary based on management overall strategy regarding compensation, including consideration of the impact of the expensing of stock option awards on our results of operations subsequent to the adoption of FAS 123(R). Based on current analyses and information, we expect that the combination of expensing stock options upon adoption of FAS 123(R) in 2006 and grants of restricted stock units will result in additional expense, net of state income tax benefits, totaling approximately $100 million (or a reduction in net earnings per share of $0.15) on a full year basis. We also adopted FASB Interpretation No. (FIN) 47, Accounting for Conditional Asset Retirement Obligations an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 143 , in the fourth quarter of 2005. FIN 47 clarifies the term conditional asset retirement obligation as used in FAS 143, Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations, and requires that a liability and a corresponding increase in the value of the underlying asset be recorded, and depreciation on the increased asset value be expensed, if the fair value of the obligation can be reasonably estimated. The types of asset retirement obligations that are covered by FIN 47 are those for which an entity has a legal obligation to perform an asset retirement activity, even though the timing and/or method of settling the obligation are conditional on a future event that may or may not be within the control of the entity. An example of a condition giving rise to an asset retirement obligation is the presence of embedded asbestos, radiation sources or other regulated materials in buildings or equipment. FIN 47 also clarifies when an entity would have sufficient information to reasonably estimate the fair value of an asset retirement obligation. The adoption of FIN 47 did not have a significant impact on our financial position or results of operations. This is primarily due to the fact that the fair values of the majority of our asset retirement obligations could not be reasonably estimated because they had indeterminate settlement dates, since the range of time over which we may settle the obligations is unknown and could not be estimated. Consistent with the provisions of FIN 47, each obligation will be recorded at the time the settlement date is no longer indeterminate and the obligation can be reasonably estimated. In May 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued FASB Staff Position (FSP) 106-2, Accounting and Disclosure Requirements Related to the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 . This FSP provides specific authoritative guidance on the accounting for the federal subsidy to eligible sponsors of retiree health care benefits provided under this law. Using this guidance, we estimated a projected reduction in our accumulated postretirement benefit obligation as of December 31, 2004 of $295 million from the effects of the new law. This obligation will be recognized over the remaining service lives of the employees eligible for the benefit. In January 2005, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services released regulations governing the application of the law and continued to provide clarifying guidance during 2005. Based on this guidance, the impact of adoption of the FSP was a reduction of the FAS 106 postretirement expense for the year ended December 31, 2005 of approximately $35 million. The postretirement expense computed under FAS 106 does not include the effects of U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards or income tax benefits. The adoption of the FSP did not have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2005. 73 Table of Contents Controls and Procedures We maintain disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our periodic filings with the SEC is reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules and forms, and to provide reasonable assurance that assets are safeguarded and transactions are properly executed and recorded. Our disclosure controls and procedures are also designed to ensure that information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO), as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. In designing and evaluating such controls and procedures, we recognize that any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives, and management necessarily is required to use its judgment in evaluating the cost-benefit relationship of possible controls and procedures. Also, we have investments in certain unconsolidated entities. As we do not control or manage these entities, our controls and procedures with respect to those entities are necessarily substantially more limited than those we maintain with respect to our consolidated subsidiaries. We routinely review our system of internal control over financial reporting and make changes to our processes and systems to improve controls and increase efficiency, while ensuring that we maintain an effective internal control environment. Changes may include such activities as implementing new, more efficient systems, consolidating the activities of two or more business units, and migrating certain processes to our Shared Services centers. In addition, when we acquire new businesses, we review the controls and procedures of the acquired business as part of our integration activities. We performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, as of December 31, 2005. The evaluation was performed with the participation of senior management of each business segment and key Corporate functions, and under the supervision of the CEO and CFO. Based on our evaluation, we concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of December 31, 2005. During 2005, we also performed a separate evaluation of our internal control over financial reporting in accordance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, including performing self-assessment and monitoring procedures. Based on those activities and other evaluation procedures, our management, including the CEO and CFO, concluded that internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2005. Management report on our financial statements and internal control over financial reporting appears on page 76. In addition, both our assessment and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting were audited by our independent registered public accounting firm. Their report appears on page 77. There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the most recently completed fiscal quarter that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 74 Table of Contents 
