CIK: 936468
Company Name: LOCKHEED MARTIN CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-02-25


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Financial Section Roadmap The financial section of our Form 10-K includes management discussion and analysis, our consolidated financial statements, the notes to those financial statements and a five year summary of financial information. We have prepared the following summary, or roadmap, to assist in your review of the financial section. It is designed to give you an overview of our Company and summarize some of the more important activities and events that occurred during 2009. Our Business Lockheed Martin is a global security company that principally is engaged in the research, design, development, manufacture, integration, and sustainment of advanced technology systems and products. We provide a broad range of management, engineering, technical, scientific, logistic, and information services. We serve both domestic and international customers with products and services that have defense, civil, and commercial applications, with our principal customers being agencies of the U.S. Government. Net sales to our U.S Government customer accounted for 85% of our total net sales in 2009 (84% in 2008 and 2007), either as a prime contractor or as a subcontractor. Our U.S. Government sales were made to both Department of Defense (DoD) and non-DoD agencies. Of the remaining 15% of net sales in 2009, approximately 13% related to sales to foreign government customers (including foreign military sales funded, in whole or in part, by the U.S. Government), with the remainder attributable to commercial and other customers. Our main areas of focus are in defense, space, intelligence, homeland security, and government information technology. We operate in four principal business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, Information Systems & Global Services (IS&GS), and Space Systems. As a systems integrator, our products and services range from electronics and information systems (including integrated net-centric solutions), to missiles, aircraft, and spacecraft. We organize our business segments based on the nature of the products and services offered. Financial Section Overview The financial section includes the following: Management discussion and analysis, or MD&A (pages 26 through 53) provides our management view about industry trends, risks, uncertainties, accounting policies that we view as critical in light of our business, our results of operations (including discussion of the key performance drivers of each of our business segments), our financial position, cash flows, commitments and contingencies, important events, transactions that have occurred over the last three years, and forward-looking information, as appropriate. Reports related to the financial statements and internal control over financial reporting (pages 54 through 56) include the following: A report from management indicating our responsibility for financial reporting, the financial statements, and the system of internal control over financial reporting, including an assessment of the effectiveness of those controls; A report from Ernst & Young LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, which includes their opinion on the effectiveness of our system of internal control over financial reporting; and A report from Ernst & Young LLP which includes their opinion on the fair presentation of our financial statements based on their audits. Financial statements (pages 57 through 60) include our Consolidated Statements of Earnings, Cash Flows, and Stockholders Equity for each of the last three years, and our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of the end of the last two years. Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Notes to the financial statements (pages 61 through 90) provide insight into, and are an integral part of, our financial statements. The notes contain explanations of our significant accounting policies, details about certain captions on the financial statements, information about significant events or transactions that have occurred, discussions about legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies, and selected financial information relating to our business segments. The notes to the financial statements also are prepared in accordance with GAAP. 26 Table of Contents Highlights The financial section of our Form 10-K describes our ongoing operations, including discussions about particular lines of business or programs, our ability to finance our operating activities, and trends and uncertainties in our industry and how they might affect our future operations. We also discuss items that affected our results, which were not considered in senior management assessment of the operating performance of our business segments. We separately disclose these items to assist you in your evaluation of the overall operating performance and financial condition of our consolidated company. We would like to draw your attention to the following items disclosed in this financial section and where you will find them: Topic Location(s) Critical accounting policies: Contract accounting/revenue recognition Page 31 and page 62 Postretirement benefit plans Page 33 and page 74 Environmental matters Page 35, page 62 and page 85 Goodwill Page 36 and page 61 Stock-based compensation Page 37, page 64 and page 81 Discussion of business segments Page 39 and page 66 Liquidity and cash flows Page 46 and page 59 Capital structure and resources Page 48, page 58, page 60 and page 81 Legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies Page 49 and page 84 Income taxes Page 64 and page 71 Industry Considerations U.S. Government Business Budget Priorities The U.S. Government continues to focus on developing and implementing spending, tax, and other initiatives to stimulate the economy and create jobs. The Administration is attempting to balance decisions regarding defense, homeland security, and other federal spending priorities with the cost and impact of these economic stimulus initiatives, particularly in the longer term. Although some specific priorities and initiatives may change from year to year, the investments and acquisitions we have made have been focused on aligning our businesses to address what we believe are the most enduring national imperatives and critical mission areas. But the possibility remains that one or more of our programs could be reduced, extended, or terminated as a result of the Administration assessment of priorities. The Administration spending priorities for next year were announced on February 1, 2010 with the submission of the President Budget Request for Fiscal Year 2011. We are assessing those priorities, as well as potential Congressional reaction to the proposals in the budget request. On first review, all of our key priorities appear to be well supported in the President budget request for fiscal year 2011. One exception is the proposal to cancel the NASA Constellation program, which impacts the Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle for which we are currently under contract. In addition, the President budget proposes a three-year spending freeze on specified non-DoD/civil agencies, and we are assessing the potential effect of that action on our non-DoD/civil agency programs and priorities. Every year, Congress must approve or revise the proposals contained in the annual President budget request through enactment of appropriations bills and other policy legislation, which then require final Presidential approval. The outcome of the federal budget process has a direct effect on our business, both as a prime contractor and a subcontractor on programs specifically targeted for expansion, completion, or termination. Department of Defense Business The DoD base budget has seen consistent growth over the past ten years, enabling it to grow from $300 billion at the start of the last decade to almost $550 billion in the fiscal year 2011 President Budget Request. Within the base budget, investment funding, which includes procurement and research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E), has grown from $104 billion in fiscal year 2001 to almost $190 billion in fiscal year 2011. As reflected in the fiscal year 2011 budget projections, overall defense spending is expected to continue to increase slightly over the next several years. The DoD base budget for fiscal year 2011 provided modest nominal growth above fiscal 27 Table of Contents year 2010, of 3.4%. Current estimates for the budget for fiscal year 2012 and beyond indicate that these will be about one percent real growth above the rate of inflation. On December 19, 2009, Congress completed action on the last of the fiscal year 2010 appropriations bills. With very few exceptions, our key programs were well supported in the appropriations bills. As we expected, Congress did not reverse the decisions to complete the F-22 Raptor program after delivery of 187 aircraft, cancel the VH-71 Presidential Helicopter (VH-71) program, terminate the Multiple Kill Vehicle (MKV) program, and cancel the Transformational Satellite (TSAT) program. In June 2009, we received notification that the VH-71 contract was terminated for convenience. We also received notification in June that the TSAT Mission Operations System (TMOS) contract, representing the ground support infrastructure for the TSAT program, was terminated for convenience. Funding for the additional four F-22 Raptor aircraft was approved by Congress, although we have not yet definitized the contract for that work. All remaining authorized work on the MKV program was completed in 2009, and no further work is expected to be authorized. Congress is just beginning its review of the fiscal year 2011 budget, and we are in the process of assessing the potential effect of the President fiscal year 2011 budget proposal on our future operations. The fiscal year 2011 budget proposal provides more than $11.7 billion to fund development activities and the production of 43 F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighters. Substantial funding is also requested for the C-130J tactical airlifter, C-5M modernization, Aegis Weapons System continuation, and the Littoral Combat Ship. The Administration has proposed, and Congress thus far has agreed, to fund U.S. military operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, and other unforeseeable contingency or peacekeeping operations, through a separate Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO) funding outside of the base DoD budget. Congress approved nearly $130 billion for OCO funding in the fiscal year 2010 appropriations bill, and the Administration has requested $165 billion in the fiscal year 2011 budget request. This contingency funding enables DoD to proceed with critical recapitalization and modernization programs in the base budget, rather than diverting funds available for modernization to pay for the Afghanistan and Iraq missions and other unforeseen operations. Depending on the status of ongoing contingencies in Iraq and Afghanistan, the Administration will assess the level and composition of overseas contingency budget requests going forward. Although Congress has continued to express concern about the size of budget requests for Afghanistan and Iraq, funding for ongoing operations has not been significantly curtailed by Congress to date, and these requests are expected to decrease in size as U.S. troops redeploy from Iraq as planned over the next eighteen months. The recently released fiscal year 2010 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) validates the Pentagon April 2009 decisions on program focus, budget priorities, and the preeminence of ensuring success in Afghanistan and Iraq. The Pentagon stated that the fiscal year 2010 defense budget represented a down payment on re-balancing the department priorities in keeping with the lessons learned and capabilities gained from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Those shifts are continued in the fiscal year 2011 budget and institutionalized in this QDR and out-year budget plan. As a result of adjustments that were made earlier in the year, new program terminations were largely absent in the QDR. Overall, Intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), Long Range Strike, international cooperation, and partner capacity were emphasized, each of which are strengths for us. Additionally, the increased role of 5th generation aircraft and the F-35 received QDR endorsement, as well as expanding the AC-130 fleet, increasing UAV capabilities, experimenting with conventional prompt global strike prototypes, and forces being enabled and enhanced by cyberspace, space, ballistic missile defense, and counter-weapons of mass destruction (WMD) capabilities. While the need for acquisition reform is also addressed in the QDR, most of the focus areas addressed are already under discussion between industry and the Department. In 2009, legislation was enacted on a number of acquisition reform initiatives resulting in new acquisition policies and procedures. In addition, as the U.S. Government seeks to clarify its overall policy regarding contractor performance of certain governmental functions, we are monitoring related pending regulatory actions regarding mitigation of potential organizational conflicts of interest that may impact our business in the future. We believe our broad mix of programs and capabilities continues to position us favorably to support the current and future needs of the DoD. For example, the need for more affordable logistics and sustainment, expansive use of information technology and knowledge-based solutions, and vastly improved levels of network and cybersecurity, all appear to be national priorities. To meet these changing dynamics, we have been growing our portfolio of expertise, diversifying our business, and expanding systems integration skills into adjacent businesses and programs that include surface naval vessels, rotary wing aviation and land vehicles. We are expanding production of the C-130J Super Hercules tactical airlifter to meet the needs of the U.S. Government and international customers. We also are preparing for increased production of the F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter for 28 Table of Contents the U.S. Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps, and international partners. We view this program as a significant element of a broader U.S. effort to build the capacity of alliance partners throughout the world. In the areas of space-based intelligence and information superiority, we have leadership positions on programs such as the Global Positioning Satellite program, Mobile User Objective System, the Advanced Extremely High Frequency system, the Space-Based Infrared System-High, and classified programs. Our products are represented in almost every aspect of land, sea, air, and space-based missile defense, including the Aegis Weapon System program, the Patriot Advanced Capability missile program, the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense system, and the Medium Extended Air Defense System. We continue to perform on contracts to develop and deliver essential munitions, missile, and other systems, such as Hellfire, Guided Multiple Launch Rocket Systems, and EQ-36 radar systems, to our warfighters. We are bringing our systems integration expertise, as well as our existing advanced technology products and services, into adjacent military product lines, such as the Littoral Combat Ship and the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle programs. We also have unmanned systems capabilities, including air, ground, and underwater systems. In the area of command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR) programs, our capabilities include the Air Operations Center Weapons System Integrator, the Airborne Maritime Fixed Joint Tactical Radio System, the Warfighter Information Network Tactical, the Combatant Commanders Integrated Command and Control System, and the Global Communications Support System Air Force. We have a significant presence in the support and modernization of the DoD information technology systems. We see opportunities for expansion of our sustainment and logistical support activities to enhance the longevity and cost-effectiveness of the systems procured by our customers, and for improving global supply chain management. We also see opportunities to grow our business in providing global services and business process management for DoD needs. To date, we have seen no significant impact on our business from implementation of the DoD policy to increase its staffing levels and move work scope currently performed by private contractors back to U.S. Government employees. Over time, however, this work scope realignment has the potential to reduce the level of work performed by outside contractors, including work on certain of our programs. We believe revenue growth in our defense business will match or exceed expected growth in the DoD budget in fiscal year 2011. We expect continued growth in our core and adjacent businesses for both domestic and international customers, as we broaden our portfolio and remain committed to excellence in execution. Our revenues have historically not been significantly dependent on overseas contingency or supplemental funding requests. Many of our programs require funding over several annual government budget cycles. There is always an inherent risk that these and other DoD programs could become potential targets for future reductions or elimination of funding to pay for other programs, either in the Administration budget reviews or in the Congressional process of annual appropriations. Non-Department of Defense Business Our experience in the defense arena, together with our core information technology and services expertise, has enabled us to provide products and services to a number of government agencies, including the Departments of Homeland Security, Justice, Commerce, Health and Human Services, State, Transportation, and Energy, the U.S. Postal Service, the Social Security Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the National Archives, and the Library of Congress. The Administration budget proposal for fiscal year 2011 proposes less than one percent nominal growth in civil agency budgets compared to fiscal year 2010. In addition, the President budget proposes a three-year freeze in certain civil agency budgets. Both of these proposals must be reviewed by Congress and will be subject to final Congressional approval in the appropriations process. Civil programs must continue to compete with resource requirements for security, economic stimulus, and deficit management. Though we expect to see relatively small increases in total non-defense discretionary spending in the near term, we believe our key programs will continue to be supported in the budgets of the various agencies with which we do business. As previously disclosed, one exception is the proposed cancellation of the program that includes the Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle for which we are currently under contract. We have continued to expand our capabilities in critical intelligence, knowledge management, and e-Government solutions for our customers, including the Social Security Administration and the EPA, as well for the DoD. We also provide program management, business strategy and consulting, complex systems development and maintenance, complete life-cycle software support, information assurance, and enterprise solutions. In the civil arena, we also have not seen significant impact 29 Table of Contents on our business from the Administration stated policy of returning certain work to U.S. Government employees, known as in-sourcing . We believe that there will be continued demand by federal and civil government agencies for upgrading and investing in new information technology systems and solutions. As a result, we continue to focus our resources in support of infrastructure modernization that allows for interoperability and communication across agencies. Our recent experiences with non-DoD agencies have reinforced our strategy of becoming the world premier global security company. We have seen the global security environment becoming much more complex and dynamic. The very definition of security has continued to change. Over and above traditional military preparedness, we have seen and been a part of further expansion into more effective counter-terrorism and intelligence capabilities, international cooperation activities requiring more interoperable systems, and humanitarian, peacekeeping, and operational stabilization initiatives. Consistent with our DoD business, more affordable logistics and sustainment, a more expansive use of information technology and knowledge-based solutions, and improved levels of network and cybersecurity all appear to be priorities in our non-DoD business as well. Homeland security, critical infrastructure protection, and improved service levels for civil government agencies also appear to be high customer priorities. The continuing strong emphasis on homeland security may increase demand for our capabilities in areas such as air traffic management, ports, waterways and cargo security, biohazard detection systems for postal equipment, employee identification and credential verification systems, information systems security, and other global security systems solutions. In addition, we may see an increase in demand from the Department of State and the United Nations for mission services, global security and stability operations, and facility services. We have made disciplined acquisitions and investments to reinforce our presence and skills in the information sciences domain. We believe expanded access to continuous high quality situational awareness will remain essential in assuring clarity and reducing uncertainty in today environment. The very need for this increased situational awareness will drive the linkage of increasingly robust communication systems, advanced sensing devices and the computers that control them. This capability will enable the meaningful sharing of information, and networks will continue to grow in power and importance to accommodate these new linkages. We also believe the criticality of network security will result in increased demand for cybersecurity and encryption security solutions. We expect to be well-positioned to meet these growing needs. Similar to the risks inherent in our defense business, funding for our civil agency business is contingent on approval in annual appropriations for each of the agencies with which we have business. Major programs may be funded over several annual government budget cycles, with the risk of future reductions or elimination in the Administration budget review or in the annual Congressional appropriations process. Other Business Considerations We are exposed to risks associated with U.S. Government contracting, including technological uncertainties, dependence on fewer manufacturing suppliers, and obsolescence, as well as Congressional appropriation and allotment of funds each year. Many of our programs involve the development and application of state-of-the-art technologies aimed at achieving challenging goals. As a result, setbacks, delays, cost growth, and product failures can occur. In years that an appropriations bill has not been signed into law before September 30 (the end of the U.S. Government fiscal year), Congress typically passes a continuing resolution that authorizes U.S. Government agencies to continue to operate, generally at the same funding levels from the prior year, but does not authorize new spending initiatives. During periods covered by continuing resolutions (or until the regular appropriation bills are passed), we may experience delays in procurement of products and services due to lack of funding, and those delays may affect our revenue and profit during the period. As a government contractor, we are subject to U.S. Government oversight. The U.S. Government may ask about and investigate our business practices and audit our compliance with applicable rules and regulations. Depending on the results of those audits and investigations, the U.S. Government could make claims against us. Under U.S. Government procurement regulations and practices, an indictment of a government contractor could result in that contractor being fined and suspended from being able to bid on, or be awarded, new U.S. Government contracts for a period of time. A conviction could result in debarment for a specific period of time. Similar government oversight exists in most other countries where we conduct business. Although we cannot predict the outcome of these types of investigations and inquiries with certainty, based on current facts we believe the probability is remote that any of the claims, audits, or investigations pending against us will have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows, or financial position. 30 Table of Contents We have entered into various joint ventures, teaming agreements, and other business arrangements to help support our portfolio of products and services in many of our lines of business, and their activities are closely aligned with our operations. For example, we have a 50% equity interest in United Launch Alliance, L.L.C. (ULA), which provides the production, engineering, test, and launch operations associated with U.S. Government launches on Atlas and Delta launch vehicles. In some cases, we form joint ventures with one or more other contractors for the purpose of pursuing a bid for a particular contract and, if successful, the joint venture serves as the prime contractor under that contract. In those instances, the work under contract is sometimes performed by subcontractors to the joint venture including, but not limited to, the joint venture investors. We attempt to limit our exposure under these arrangements to our investment in the joint venture, which is typically not material, and to the performance of our obligations under the subcontract. While we may in some cases guarantee contractual performance by the joint venture, we are usually cross-indemnified by the other joint venture participants to the extent of their contractual performance obligations. We remain committed to growth in our sales to international customers. We conduct business with foreign governments primarily through Aeronautics and Electronic Systems. Our international sales are composed of foreign military sales through the U.S. Government and direct commercial contracts. In Aeronautics, the U.S. Government and eight foreign government partners are working together on the design, testing, production, and sustainment of the F-35 Lightning II. We expect international deliveries to begin in 2011. The F-16 Fighting Falcon has been selected by 25 countries, with 52 follow-on buys from 14 countries. We continue to expand the C-130J Super Hercules air mobility aircraft international footprint with customers in 11 countries including recent orders from India and Qatar. In global sustainment, we are leveraging our value as the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) for our major platforms and have set up new production capabilities to provide service life extension, including new wings and support for Norway P-3 fleet and the recent awards from the U.S. and Canadian Governments to upgrade their P-3 aircraft. With regard to the Aegis Weapon System, our Electronic Systems segment performs activities in the development, production, ship integration and test, and lifetime support for ships of international customers ( e.g. , Japan, Spain, Korea, Norway, and Australia). This segment has two contracts with the Canadian Government for the upgrade and support of combat systems on Halifax class frigates and Iroquois class destroyers. Electronic Systems also produces the PAC-3 missile, an advanced defensive missile designed to intercept incoming airborne threats, for international customers including Japan, Germany, the Netherlands and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). IS&GS, through its subsidiary Pacific Architects and Engineers (PAE), continues to increase our presence in certain less developed countries by providing base camp construction, logistics, democratization and management services, among others, through our contracts with such customers as the United Nations and the U.S. Department of State. In addition, IS&GS is providing all data processing for the 2011 population census in England and Wales, including development of the related system. To the extent our contracts and business arrangements with international partners include operations in foreign countries, other risks are introduced into our business, including changing economic conditions, fluctuations in relative currency values, regulation by foreign countries, and the potential for unanticipated cost increases resulting from the possible deterioration of political relations. The nature of our international business also makes us subject to the export control regulations of the U. S. Department of State and the Department of Commerce. If these regulations are violated, it could result in monetary penalties and denial of export privileges. We are currently unaware of any violations of export control regulations that are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows, or financial position. Critical Accounting Policies Contract Accounting / Revenue Recognition Approximately 80% of our net sales are derived from long-term contracts for design, development, and production activities (also referred to as DD&P contracts). Our remaining net sales are derived from contracts to provide other services that are not associated with design, development, or production activities. We consider the nature of our contracts and the types of products and services provided when we determine the proper accounting method for a particular contract. 31 Table of Contents Accounting for Design, Development, and Production Contracts For long-term, fixed-price DD&P contracts that, among other factors, require us to provide a number of similar items produced in a stable production environment, we record sales on a percentage of completion basis using units-of-delivery as the basis to measure progress toward completing the contract. For example, we use this method of revenue recognition on our C-130J tactical transport aircraft program and Multiple Launch Rocket System program. For certain other long-term, fixed-price DD&P contracts that, along with other factors, require us to deliver minimal quantities over a longer period of time or to perform a substantial level of development effort in comparison to the total value of the contract, sales are recorded when we achieve performance milestones or using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress toward completion. Under the cost-to-cost method of accounting, we recognize sales based on the ratio of costs incurred to our estimate of total costs at completion. As an example, we use this methodology for our Aegis Weapon System program. In some instances, long-term production programs may require a significant level of development and/or a low rate of initial production in their early phases, but will ultimately require delivery of increased quantities in later, full-rate production stages. In those cases, the revenue recognition methodology may change from the cost-to-cost method to the units-of-delivery method as new contracts for different phases of a program are received after considering, among other factors, program and production stability. As we incur costs under cost-reimbursement-type contracts, we record sales and an estimated profit. Cost-reimbursement-type contracts include time and materials and other level-of-effort-type contracts. Examples of this type of revenue recognition include the F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter development and low-rate initial production contracts, and the THAAD missile defense program. Most of our long-term contracts are denominated in U.S. dollars, including contracts for sales of military products and services to foreign governments conducted through the U.S. Government ( i.e., foreign military sales). As a general rule, we recognize sales and profits earlier in a production cycle when we use the cost-to-cost and milestone methods of percentage of completion accounting than when we use the units-of-delivery method. In addition, our profits and margins may vary materially depending on the types of long-term contracts undertaken, the costs incurred in their performance, the achievement of other performance objectives, and the stage of performance at which the right to receive fees, particularly under award and incentive fee contracts, is finally determined. Award fees and incentives related to performance on DD&P contracts, which are generally awarded at the discretion of the customer, as well as penalties related to contract performance, are considered in estimating sales and profit rates. Estimates of award fees are based on actual awards and anticipated performance. Incentive provisions that increase or decrease earnings based solely on a single significant event are generally not recognized until the event occurs. Those incentives and penalties are recorded when there is sufficient information for us to assess anticipated performance. Accounting for DD&P contracts requires judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract revenues and costs, and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. Due to the scope and nature of the work required to be performed on many of our contracts, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. Contract costs include material, labor, and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs. We have to make assumptions regarding labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the availability of materials, the length of time to complete the contract (to estimate increases in wages and prices for materials), performance by our subcontractors, and the availability and timing of funding from our customer, among other variables. For contract change orders, claims, or similar items, we apply judgment in estimating the amounts and assessing the potential for realization. These amounts are only included in contract value when they can be reliably estimated and realization is considered probable. We have accounting policies in place to address these, as well as other contractual and business arrangements to properly account for long-term contracts. Products and services provided under long-term DD&P contracts represented approximately 80% of our net sales for 2009. Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if our underlying circumstances were to change. For example, if underlying assumptions were to change such that our estimated profit rate at completion for all DD&P contracts was higher or lower by one percentage point, our 2009 net earnings would have increased or decreased by approximately $235 million. When adjustments in estimated contract revenues or estimated costs at completion are required, any changes from prior estimates are recognized by recording adjustments in the current period for the inception-to-date effect of the changes on current and prior periods. When estimates of total costs to be incurred on a contract exceed total estimates of revenue to be earned, a provision for the entire loss on the contract is recorded in the period the loss is determined. 32 Table of Contents Accounting for Services Contracts Revenue under contracts for services other than those associated with design, development, or production activities is recognized either as services are performed or when a contractually required event has occurred, depending on the contract. The majority of our services contracts are in our IS&GS segment, including the Automated Flight Service Station contract to provide a network of air traffic facilities and related services, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers contract to provide information management and technology services. Services contracts primarily include operations and maintenance contracts and outsourcing-type arrangements. Revenue under such contracts is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the period of contract performance, unless evidence suggests that the revenue is earned or the obligations are fulfilled in a different pattern. Costs incurred under these services contracts are expensed as incurred, except that initial set-up costs are capitalized and recognized ratably over the life of the agreement. Earnings related to services contracts may fluctuate from period to period, particularly in the earlier phases of the contract. Award fees and incentives related to performance on services contracts are recognized when they are fixed and determinable, generally at the date the amount is communicated to us by the customer. Other Contract Accounting Considerations The majority of our sales are driven by pricing based on costs incurred to produce products or perform services under contracts with the U.S. Government. Cost-based pricing is determined under the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR). The FAR provides guidance on the types of costs that are allowable in establishing prices for goods and services under U.S. Government contracts. For example, costs such as those related to charitable contributions, interest expense, and certain advertising and public relations activities are unallowable, and therefore not recoverable through sales. In addition, we may enter into advance agreements with the U.S. Government that address the subjects of allowability and allocability of costs to contracts for specific matters. For example, most of the environmental costs we incur for groundwater treatment and soil remediation related to sites operated in prior years are allocated to our current operations as general and administrative costs under FAR provisions and supporting advance agreements reached with the U.S. Government. We closely monitor compliance with, and the consistent application of, our critical accounting policies related to contract accounting. Business segment personnel evaluate our contracts through periodic contract status and performance reviews. Also, regular and recurring evaluations of contract cost, scheduling, and technical matters are performed by management personnel independent from the business segment performing work under the contract. Costs incurred and allocated to contracts are reviewed for compliance with U.S. Government regulations by our personnel, and are subject to audit by the Defense Contract Audit Agency. For other information on accounting policies we have in place for recognizing sales and profits, see our discussion under Sales and earnings in Note 1 to the financial statements. Postretirement Benefit Plans Most of our employees are covered by defined benefit pension plans, and we provide certain health care and life insurance benefits to eligible retirees (collectively, postretirement benefit plans see Note 10). Our earnings may be negatively or positively impacted by the amount of expense or income we record for our postretirement benefit plans. This is particularly true with expense or income for defined benefit pension plans and retiree medical and life insurance plans because those calculations are sensitive to changes in several key economic assumptions and workforce demographics. Non-union represented employees hired on or after January 1, 2006 do not participate in our qualified defined benefit pension plans, but are eligible to participate in our qualified defined contribution plan and our other retirement savings plans. They also have the ability to participate in our retiree medical plans, but we do not subsidize the cost of their participation in those plans as we do with employees hired before January 1, 2006. In accordance with the rules related to postretirement benefit plans under GAAP, we recognize on a plan-by-plan basis the funded status of our postretirement benefit plans as either an asset or liability on our Balance Sheet, with a corresponding adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax, in stockholders equity. The funded status is measured as the difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the benefit obligation of the plan. Actuarial Assumptions GAAP requires that the amounts we record, including the expense or income for the plans, be computed using actuarial valuations. These valuations include many assumptions, including assumptions we make regarding financial market and other economic conditions. Changes in key economic indicators can result in changes in the assumptions we use. The primary year-end assumptions used to estimate postretirement benefit plan expense or income for the following calendar year 33 Table of Contents are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets for all postretirement benefit plans; the rates of increase in future compensation levels for our defined benefit pension plans; and the health care cost trend rates for our retiree medical plans. We use judgment in reassessing these assumptions each year because we have to consider past and current market conditions, and make judgments about future market trends. We also have to consider factors like the timing and amounts of expected contributions to the plans and benefit payments to plan participants. The discount rate we select impacts both the calculation of the benefit obligation at the end of the year and the calculation of net postretirement benefit plan cost in the subsequent year. The difference between the long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption we select and the actual return on plan assets in any given year affects both the funded status of our benefit plans and the calculation of net postretirement benefit plan cost in subsequent years. We evaluate several data points in order to arrive at an appropriate discount rate. These items include results from cash flow models, quoted rates from long-term bond indices, and changes in long-term bond rates over the past year. As part of our evaluation, we calculate the approximate average yields on securities that were selected to match our projected postretirement benefit plan cash flows. Our postretirement benefit plan cash flows are input into actuarial models that include data for corporate bonds rated AA or better. The available universe of bonds is adjusted to reflect call provisions, outstanding issue amount, and bonds that are considered outliers (i.e., bonds with yields significantly above or below the mean of the available universe of bonds). As of December 31, 2009, three actuarial models calculated rates of 5.82%, 5.94%, and 5.89% for our qualified defined benefit pension plans. We also evaluated the annualized Merrill Lynch index for long-term AA corporate bonds (15+ years), which was 6.04% at the close of 2009. On average, these data points were 25 basis points lower than at December 31, 2008. After reviewing all of the above data, we selected 5.875% as the discount rate for calculating our benefit obligations at December 31, 2009, compared to 6.125% used at the end of 2008. The long-term rate of return assumption represents the expected average rate of earnings on the funds invested, or to be invested, to provide for the benefits included in the plan obligation. This assumption is based on several factors including historical market index returns, the anticipated long-term allocation of plan assets, the historical return data for the trust funds, plan expenses, and the potential to outperform market index returns. The actual return in any specific year likely will differ from the assumption, but the average expected return over a long-term future horizon should be approximated by the assumption. As a result, changes in this assumption are less frequent than changes in the discount rate. Any variance in a given year should not, by itself, suggest that the assumption should be changed. Patterns of variances are reviewed over time and then combined with expectations for the future. At December 31, 2009, we concluded that 8.50% was a reasonable estimate for the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption, consistent with the rate used at December 31, 2008. The impact of the change in the discount rate, together with other factors such as the approximate 20% actual return on plan assets resulting from improved market conditions in 2009, was a noncash, after-tax increase to our stockholders equity at December 31, 2009 of approximately $495 million. The increase primarily resulted from the excess of our actual return on plan assets over our 8.50% long-term rate of return assumption, which partially was offset by the effects of the decrease in the discount rate. The 2010 pension expense will be approximately $1.4 billion, as compared to $1.0 billion in 2009. The increase in 2010 pension expense is due to the decrease in the discount rate and the continued amortization of the actuarial losses incurred in 2008, which resulted from the significant negative return on plan assets compared to our 8.50% long-term rate of return assumption. The discount rate assumption we select at the end of each year is based on our best estimates and judgment. A reasonably possible change of plus or minus 25 basis points in the 5.875% discount rate assumption at December 31, 2009, with all other assumptions held constant, would decrease or increase the amount of the qualified pension benefit obligation we recorded at the end of 2009 by approximately $1.0 billion, resulting in an after-tax increase or decrease in stockholders equity at the end of the year of approximately $650 million. If the 5.875% discount rate at December 31, 2009 that was used to compute 2010 expense for our qualified defined benefit pension plans had been 25 basis points higher or lower, with all other assumptions held constant, the amount of expense projected for 2010 would be lower or higher by approximately $95 million. Valuation of Postretirement Benefit Plan Assets Valuation of the assets held in a number of trusts to support our postretirement benefit plans requires judgment relative to the determination of fair value as of December 31. While many of the asset values are based on quoted prices in active markets for identical assets ( e.g. , stock of actively traded public companies), the trustees for the trusts use various pricing sources to determine fair values for other assets where their value may be based on quoted prices for similar instruments or 34 Table of Contents quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in inactive markets; or amounts derived from valuation models where all significant inputs are based on active markets that can be observed ( e.g. , fixed income debt securities). For still other investments, values may be derived from valuation models where one or more of the significant inputs into the model cannot be observed and that require the development of relevant assumptions ( e.g. , investments in private equity funds and real estate funds). For these assets, fair values are determined by the general partners of the funds or independent administrators, typically using both income and market approaches in their valuation models. The funds are also audited by independent auditors annually. We review the trustees policies and procedures regarding pricing of investments, their selection of pricing sources, and the statements and supporting documentation we receive from them, in our evaluation of the accuracy and reliability of the pricing data included in the statements. We also assess the potential for adjustment to the fair value of certain investments where there is a lag in the availability of data to support the investment value ( e.g. , private equity funds and investments in real estate partnerships). In those cases, we may solicit preliminary valuation updates at year-end from the funds and partnerships. We use that information, and corroborating data from public markets, to determine if any adjustments should be recorded in the fair values. At December 31, 2009, these types of investments represented approximately 11% of the total fair value of the postretirement benefit plan assets. Other Considerations U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS) are a major factor we consider in determining our total pension funding and govern the extent to which our pension costs are allocable to and recoverable under contracts with the U.S. Government. Funded amounts are recovered over time through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and are recognized in our net sales. The amount of funding required under CAS for our qualified defined benefit pension plans for 2009, and therefore the amount included in our segments operating results for the year, was $580 million. For 2010, we expect the funding required under CAS will be about $1.0 billion. Additional funding requirements computed under the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) rules, as well as discretionary payments, are considered to be prepayments under the CAS rules to the extent the amounts exceed CAS funding requirements. These amounts would be recorded on our Balance Sheet and recovered in future periods. In 2009, 2008, and 2007, we made discretionary contributions of $1,482 million, $109 million, and $335 million related to our qualified defined benefit pension plans. Based on our known requirements as of December 31, 2009, including consideration of the discretionary contribution made in 2009, no contributions related to our qualified defined benefit pension plans are expected to be required in 2010. We do expect to make discretionary contributions of $1.4 billion related to our qualified defined benefit pension plans, as we anticipate that funding requirements under the Pension Protection Act (see discussion below) beginning in 2011 will be higher than requirements in previous years. We also may review options for further contributions in 2010. We anticipate recovering approximately $1.0 billion as CAS cost during 2010, with the remainder being recoverable in future years. In August 2006, legislation was enacted related to pension plan funding, known as the Pension Protection Act, in response to the public concern over the adequacy of such funding. The law had the effect of accelerating the required amount of annual pension plan contributions under the IRC that most companies are required to pay, beginning in 2008. The legislation provided an exemption for us, as well as other large U.S. defense contractors, that delayed the requirement to accelerate funding. The legislation also requires the CAS Board to modify its pension accounting rules by 2010 to better align the recovery of pension contributions on U.S. Government contracts with the new accelerated funding requirements. The new funding requirements for large U.S. defense contractors have been delayed until the earlier of 2011 or the year in which the changes to the CAS rules are effective. We currently expect that the pension reform funding provisions will impact us and other large U.S. defense contractors in 2011. The CAS Board has not published changes to its pension accounting rules as of December 31, 2009. Environmental Matters We are a party to various agreements, proceedings, and potential proceedings for environmental cleanup issues, including matters at various sites where we have been designated a potentially responsible party (PRP) by the EPA or by a state agency. We enter into agreements ( e.g., administrative orders, consent decrees) that document the extent and timing of our environmental remediation obligation. We also are involved in remediation activities at environmental sites where formal agreements either do not exist or do not quantify the extent and timing of our obligation. Environmental cleanup activities 35 Table of Contents usually span many years, which makes estimating the costs more judgmental due to, for example, changing remediation technologies. To determine the costs related to cleanup sites, we have to assess the extent of contamination, the appropriate technology to be used to accomplish the remediation, and evolving regulatory environmental standards. We consider these factors in our estimates of the timing and amount of any future costs that may be required for remediation actions, which generally results in the calculation of a range of estimates for a particular environmental site. We record a liability for the amount within the range that we determine to be our best estimate of the cost of remediation or, in cases where no amount within the range is better than another, an amount at the low end of the range. Given the required level of judgment and estimation, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if different assumptions were used or if circumstances were to change ( e.g., a change in environmental standards or a change in our estimate of the extent of contamination). We perform quarterly reviews of environmental remediation sites and record liabilities and assets in the period it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred and the amounts can be reasonably estimated (see the discussion under Environmental Matters in Notes 1 and 13 to the financial statements). At the end of 2009, the total amount of liabilities recorded on our Balance Sheet for environmental matters was $877 million. We have recorded assets totaling $740 million at December 31, 2009 for the portion of environmental costs that are probable of future recovery in pricing of our products and services for agencies of the U.S. Government. The amount that is expected to be allocated to our commercial businesses or that is determined to be unallowable for pricing under U.S. Government contracts has been expensed through cost of sales. Under agreements reached with the U.S. Government, most of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation are allocated to our operations as general and administrative costs. Under existing government regulations, these and other environmental expenditures relating to our U.S. Government business, after deducting any recoveries received from insurance or other PRPs, are allowable in establishing prices of our products and services. As a result, most of the expenditures we incur are included in our net sales and cost of sales according to U.S. Government agreement or regulation. As disclosed above, we may record changes in the amount of environmental remediation liabilities as a result of our quarterly reviews of the status of our environmental remediation sites, which would result in a change to the corresponding environmental asset and a charge to earnings. For example, if we were to determine that the liabilities should be increased by $100 million, the corresponding assets would be increased by approximately $85 million, with the remainder recorded as a charge to earnings. This allocation is determined annually, based upon our existing and projected business activities with the U.S. Government. We cannot reasonably determine the extent of our financial exposure at all environmental sites with which we are involved. There are a number of former operating facilities we are monitoring or investigating for potential future remediation. In some cases, although a loss may be probable, it is not possible at this time to reasonably estimate the amount of any obligation for remediation activities because of uncertainties ( e.g. , assessing the extent of the contamination). During any particular quarter, such uncertainties may be resolved to allow us to estimate and recognize the initial liability to remediate a particular former operating site. The amount of the liability could be material. Upon recognition of the liability, a portion will be recognized as an asset with the remainder charged to operations. If we are ultimately found to have liability at those sites where we have been designated a PRP, we expect that the actual costs of remediation will be shared with other liable PRPs. Generally, PRPs that are ultimately determined to be responsible parties are strictly liable for site cleanup and usually agree among themselves to share, on an allocated basis, the costs and expenses for investigation and remediation of hazardous materials. Under existing environmental laws, responsible parties are jointly and severally liable and, therefore, we are potentially liable for the full cost of funding such remediation. In the unlikely event that we were required to fund the entire cost of such remediation, the statutory framework provides that we may pursue rights of contribution from the other PRPs. The amounts we record do not reflect the fact that we may recover some of the environmental costs we have incurred through insurance or from other PRPs, which we are required to pursue by agreement and U.S. Government regulation. Goodwill We review goodwill for impairment on an annual basis and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. Such events or circumstances could include significant changes in the business climate of our industry, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or disposal of a portion of a reporting unit. The assessment is performed at the reporting unit level. Our annual testing date is October 1. 36 Table of Contents Performing the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including how we define reporting units and determine their fair value. We consider a component of our business to be a reporting unit if it constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available and management regularly reviews the operating results of that component. We estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using a discounted cash flow methodology that requires significant judgment. Forecasts of future cash flows are based on our best estimate of future sales and operating costs, based primarily on existing firm orders, expected future orders, contracts with suppliers, labor agreements, and general market conditions. The discount rate applied to our forecasts of future cash flows is based on our estimated weighted average cost of capital. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and/or goodwill impairment for each reporting unit. We evaluate goodwill for impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value, we measure impairment by comparing the derived fair value of goodwill to its carrying value, and any impairment determined is recorded in the current period. Our goodwill at December 31, 2009 amounted to $9.9 billion. We completed our assessment of goodwill as of October 1, 2009 and determined that the estimated fair value of each reporting unit exceeded its corresponding carrying amount and, as such, no impairment existed at that date. Changes in estimates and assumptions we make in conducting our goodwill assessment could affect the estimated fair value of one or more of our reporting units and could result in a goodwill impairment charge in a future period. However, a 25% decrease in the estimated fair value of any of our reporting units at October 1, 2009 would not have resulted in a goodwill impairment charge. We currently do not believe that any of our reporting units are at risk of failing a goodwill impairment test in the near term. Stock-Based Compensation We recognize compensation cost related to all share-based payments, including restricted stock units (RSUs) and stock options. Compensation cost for RSUs is based on the market value of our common stock on the date of the award. We estimate the fair value for stock options at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Our stock options do not include market or performance conditions. We generally recognize the compensation cost for RSUs and stock options ratably over a three-year vesting period. The Black-Scholes model requires us to make estimates and assumptions in determining certain inputs to the model, including a volatility factor for our stock, an expected life of the option, and a risk-free interest rate. We estimate volatility based on the historical volatility of our daily stock price over the past five years, which is commensurate with the expected life of the options. We base the average expected life on the contractual term of the stock option, historical trends in option exercise activity, and post-vesting employment termination trends. We analyzed the option exercise patterns of our employees and determined there are no significant differences between employee groups. We base the risk-free interest rate on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected life assumed at the date of grant. We also are required to estimate forfeitures at the date of grant, which we base on historical experience. If any of our estimates or assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model were to change significantly, stock-based compensation expense could differ materially in the future from the amount recorded in 2009. Compensation cost recognized in 2009, 2008, and 2007 totaled $154 million, $155 million, and $149 million. 37 Table of Contents Results of Operations Since our operating cycle is long-term and involves many types of DD&P contracts with varying production delivery schedules, the results of operations of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of recorded sales and profits, may not be indicative of future operating results. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context. All per share amounts cited in this discussion are presented on a per diluted share basis. Net Sales (In billions) The following discussion of operating results provides an overview of our operations by focusing on key elements in our Statement of Earnings. The Discussion of Business Segments section that follows describes the contributions of each of our business segments to our consolidated net sales and operating profit for 2009, 2008, and 2007. We follow an integrated approach for managing the performance of our business, and focus the discussion of our results of operations around major products and lines of business versus distinguishing between products and services. Product sales are predominantly generated in the Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, and Space Systems segments, while most of our services revenues are generated in our IS&GS segment. For 2009, net sales were $45.2 billion, a 6% increase over 2008. Net sales for 2008 were $42.7 billion, a 2% increase over 2007. Net sales increased during 2009 in all segments as compared to 2008. Net sales increased during 2008 compared to 2007 in the Electronic Systems and IS&GS segments but declined in Aeronautics primarily due to fewer combat aircraft deliveries and, at Space Systems, due to both government and commercial satellite activities. The U.S. Government is our largest customer, accounting for about 85% of our net sales in 2009 and about 84% in 2008 and 2007. Other income (expense), net was $242 million for 2009 compared to $482 million in 2008. This decrease primarily was due to the recognition of a deferred gain of $108 million in 2008 from the sale of our ownership interest in Lockheed Khrunichev Energia International, Inc. (LKEI) and International Launch Services, Inc. (ILS) in 2006; earnings of $85 million recorded in 2008 associated with reserves related to various land sales that were no longer required; and a loss of $24 million on the 2009 sale of a foreign subsidiary. Other income (expense), net was $482 million for 2008 compared to $293 million in 2007. This increase was primarily due to an additional $86 million in equity earnings in affiliates in 2008 compared to 2007, the recognition of the LKEI and ILS deferred gain in 2008, and the earnings associated with the elimination of reserves related to various land sales in 2008. State income taxes are included in our operations as general and administrative costs and, under U.S. Government regulations, are allowable in establishing prices for the products and services we sell to the U.S. Government. Therefore, a substantial portion of state income taxes is included in our net sales and cost of sales. As a result, the impact on our operating profit of certain transactions and other matters disclosed in this Form 10-K is disclosed net of state income taxes. Our operating profit for 2009 was $4.5 billion, a decrease of 13% compared to 2008. Our operating profit for 2008 was $5.1 billion, an increase of 13% compared to 2007. In 2009, operating profit was negatively impacted by higher unallocated Corporate costs and the decrease in other income (expense), net as discussed above. These declines more than offset increased operating profit at the Aeronautics, Electronic Systems and Space Systems business segments. The higher unallocated Corporate costs in 2009 mainly were attributable to the impact of the FAS/CAS pension adjustment, which resulted in expense in 2009 of $456 million as compared to income in 2008 of $128 million due to the negative actual return on plan assets in 2008 and a lower discount rate at December 31, 2008 compared to December 31, 2007. Except for reductions at Aeronautics, operating profit increased in all business segments in 2008 as compared to 2007. Operating profit in 2008 was favorably impacted by lower unallocated Corporate costs and the increase in other income (expense), net as discussed above. Unallocated Corporate costs in 2008 were favorably impacted by declines in the FAS/CAS pension adjustment, primarily due to the decline in FAS pension expense. 38 Table of Contents Interest expense for 2009 was $305 million, or $36 million lower than 2008. The decrease mainly was driven by the August 2008 redemption of our $1.0 billion of floating rate convertible debentures, partially offset by increases resulting from the fourth quarter 2009 issuance of $1.5 billion of long-term notes and the first quarter 2008 issuance of $500 million of long-term notes. Interest expense for 2008 was $341 million, or $11 million lower than 2007. The decrease was primarily attributable to the August 2008 redemption of the floating rate convertible debentures, partially offset by an increase due the first quarter 2008 issuance of $500 million of long-term notes. Other non-operating income (expense), net was income of $123 million in 2009 compared to expense of $88 million in 2008. The increase primarily was due to net unrealized gains on marketable securities held in a Rabbi Trust to fund certain non-qualified employee benefit obligations partially offset by lower interest income on invested cash balances. Other non-operating income (expense), net was expense of $88 million in 2008 compared to income of $193 million in 2007. The decrease in 2008 primarily was due to net unrealized losses on marketable securities held to fund certain non-qualified employee benefit obligations and lower interest income on invested cash balances. Our effective income tax rates were 29.4% for 2009, 31.6% for 2008, and 30.6% for 2007. These rates were lower than the statutory rate of 35% for all periods due to tax benefits for U.S. manufacturing activities, dividends related to our employee stock ownership plans, and the research and development tax credit. In addition, the rate for 2009 reflected a tax benefit of $69 million arising from the resolution of IRS examinations of the 2005 to 2007 and 2008 tax years and an additional tax benefit from the partial elimination of a valuation allowance previously provided against certain foreign company deferred tax assets arising from carryforwards of unused tax benefits. The rate for 2007 reflected a tax benefit of $59 million arising from the closure of the IRS examination of the 2003 and 2004 tax years. We reported net earnings of $3.0 billion ($7.78 per share) in 2009, $3.2 billion ($7.86 per share) in 2008, and $3.0 billion ($7.10 per share) in 2007. Both net earnings and earnings per share were affected by the factors discussed above. In addition, earnings per share has benefitted from the significant number of shares repurchased under our share repurchase program. The effect of those repurchases has been partially offset by common stock issued under our stock-based compensation and defined contribution plans. Discussion of Business Segments We operate in four principal business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, IS&GS, and Space Systems. We organize our business segments based on the nature of the products and services offered. The Aeronautics segment generally includes fewer programs that have much larger sales and operating results than programs included in the other segments. Due to the large number of comparatively smaller programs in the remaining segments, the discussion of the results of operations of those business segments focuses on lines of business within the segment rather than on specific programs. The following tables of financial information and related discussion of the results of operations of our business segments are consistent with the presentation of segment information in Note 4 to the financial statements. We have a number of programs that are classified by the U.S. Government and cannot be specifically described. The operating results of these classified programs are included in our consolidated and business segment results, and are subjected to the same oversight and internal controls as our other programs. Our Aeronautics business segment is engaged in the research, design, development, manufacture, integration, sustainment, support, and upgrade of advanced military aircraft, including combat and air mobility aircraft, unmanned air vehicles, and related technologies. Key Combat Aircraft programs include the F-35 Lightning II, F-16 Fighting Falcon, and F-22 Raptor fighter aircraft. The F-35 has completed the eighth year of development and has entered low rate initial production (LRIP). We expect the first deliveries under the LRIP program to begin in 2010 which, together with other program activities, will result in an increase in sales over 2009 levels. We continue to produce F-16 aircraft for foreign customers, delivering a total of 31 F-16s in 2009 worldwide. We are currently projecting that F-16 sales will decline in 2010 over 2009 levels due to lower deliveries. Aeronautics has been producing F-22s since 1997. As noted previously, the U.S Government has decided to discontinue production of the F-22 after delivery of the 187 aircraft on order, which we expect will occur in early 2012. Key Air Mobility programs include the C-130J Super Hercules and the C-5M Super Galaxy. We are expecting to ramp up production and increase deliveries of C-130J aircraft in 2010, having delivered 16 in 2009. In addition to aircraft production, Aeronautics provides logistics support, sustainment, and upgrade modification services for its aircraft. Sales at Aeronautics are expected to grow overall in 2010 primarily due to the projected increase in F-35 production activities. Our Electronic Systems business segment manages complex programs and designs, develops, and integrates hardware and software solutions to ensure the mission readiness of armed forces and government agencies worldwide. With such a broad portfolio of products and services, many of its activities involve a combination of both development and production 39 Table of Contents contracts with varying delivery schedules. This business segment has continued to expand its core competencies as a systems integrator both domestically and internationally. Some of its more significant programs, including the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system, the Aegis Weapon System, and the Littoral Combat Ship program, demonstrate the diverse products and services Electronic Systems provides. Our IS&GS business segment combines a full range of information competencies with a global delivery capability. The segment provides full life-cycle support and expertise in the areas of software and systems engineering, including capabilities in space, air, and ground systems. It provides logistics, mission operation support, peacekeeping, and nation-building services for a wide variety of defense and civil government agencies in the U.S. and abroad. IS&GS key programs and activities include the En-Route Automation Modernization (ERAM) program, the Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) program, the Decennial Response Integration System (DRIS 2010) program, and a number of task order vehicles (indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity (IDIQ) contracts) across each of its lines of business. Our Space Systems business segment is engaged in the design, research and development, engineering, and production of satellites, strategic and defensive missile systems, and space transportation systems. Government satellite programs include the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) system, the Mobile User Objective System (MUOS), the Global Positioning Satellite III (GPS III) system, and the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS). Strategic and missile defense programs include the targets and countermeasures program and the fleet ballistic missile program. Space transportation includes the NASA Orion program. Through ownership interests in two joint ventures, United Launch Alliance (ULA) and United Space Alliance (USA), the segment also includes expendable launch services and Space Shuttle processing activities for the U.S. Government. The Space Shuttle is expected to finish its final flight mission in 2010 and our programs involving its launch and processing activities will end at that time. In the following table of financial data, total operating profit of the business segments is reconciled to the corresponding consolidated amount. Because the activities of the investees in which certain business segments hold equity interests are closely aligned with the operations of those segments, the equity earnings (losses) from those investees are included in the operating profit of the segments. Our largest equity investees are ULA and USA. Their equity earnings are included in Space System operating profit. The reconciling item Unallocated Corporate income (expense), net includes the FAS/CAS pension adjustment (see the discussion in Discussion of Business Segments under Unallocated Corporate Income (Expense), Net ), costs for stock-based compensation programs, the effects of items not considered part of management evaluation of segment operating performance, and Corporate costs not allocated to the operating segments, as well as other miscellaneous Corporate activities. This table shows net sales and operating profit of the business segments and reconciles to the consolidated total. (In millions) 2009 2008 2007 Net Sales Aeronautics $ 12,201 $ 11,473 $ 12,303 Electronic Systems 12,204 11,620 11,143 Information Systems & Global Services 12,130 11,611 10,213 Space Systems 8,654 8,027 8,203 Total $ 45,189 $ 42,731 $ 41,862 Operating Profit Aeronautics $ 1,577 $ 1,433 $ 1,476 Electronic Systems 1,595 1,508 1,410 Information Systems & Global Services 1,011 1,076 949 Space Systems 972 953 856 Total business segments $ 5,155 4,970 4,691 Unallocated Corporate income (expense), net (689 ) 161 (164 ) Total $ 4,466 $ 5,131 $ 4,527 The following segment discussions also include information relating to negotiated backlog for each segment. Total negotiated backlog was approximately $78.0 billion, $80.9 billion, and $76.7 billion at December 31, 2009, 2008, and 2007. These amounts included both funded backlog (unfilled firm orders for which funding has been both authorized and appropriated by the customer Congress in the case of U.S. Government agencies) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding has not yet been appropriated). Negotiated backlog does not include unexercised options or task orders to be issued under indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) contracts. Funded backlog was approximately $49.0 billion at December 31, 2009. 40 Table of Contents In our discussion of comparative results, changes in net sales and operating profit are expressed in terms of volume and/or performance. Volume refers to increases or decreases in sales resulting from varying production activity levels, deliveries or services levels on individual contracts. Volume changes typically include a corresponding change in operating profit based on the estimated profit rate at completion for a particular contract for products. Performance generally refers to changes in contract profit booking rates. These changes on our contracts for products usually relate to profit recognition associated with revisions to total estimated costs at completion of the contracts that reflect improved (or deteriorated) operating or award fee performance on a particular contract. Changes in contract profit booking rates on contracts for products are recognized by recording adjustments in the current period for the inception-to-date effect of the changes on current and prior periods. Recognition of an inception-to-date adjustment in the current or prior periods may affect the comparison of segment operating results. Segment Operating Profit (In millions) Aeronautics Aeronautics operating results included the following: (In millions) 2009 2008 2007 Net sales $ 12,201 $ 11,473 $ 12,303 Operating profit 1,577 1,433 1,476 Backlog at year-end 26,700 27,200 26,300 Net sales for Aeronautics increased by 6% in 2009 compared to 2008. During the year, sales increased in all three lines of business. The increase of $296 million in Air Mobility sales primarily was attributable to higher volume on the C-130 programs, including deliveries and support activities. There were 16 C-130J deliveries in 2009 and 12 in 2008. Combat Aircraft sales increased $316 million principally due to higher volume on the F-35 program and increases in F-16 deliveries, which partially were offset by lower volume on F-22 and other combat aircraft programs. The $116 million increase in Other Aeronautics Programs mainly was due to higher volume on P-3 programs and advanced development programs, which partially were offset by declines in sustainment activities. Net sales for Aeronautics decreased by 7% in 2008 compared to 2007. The decline in net sales was due to decreases in Combat Aircraft and Air Mobility, which more than offset increases in Other Aeronautics Programs. Combat Aircraft sales declined $947 million due to lower volume on F-16, F-22 and F-35 programs. The $74 million decrease in Air Mobility primarily was due to lower volume on other air mobility programs. There were 12 C-130J deliveries in both 2008 and 2007. The $191 million increase in Other Aeronautics Programs mainly was due to higher volume in sustainment services activities. Operating profit for the segment increased 10% in 2009 compared to 2008. The growth in operating profit primarily was due to increases in Air Mobility and Other Aeronautics Programs. The $70 million increase in Air Mobility operating profit primarily was due to the higher volume on C-130J deliveries and C-130 support programs. In Other Aeronautics Programs, operating profit increased $120 million, which mainly was attributable to improved performance in sustainment activities and higher volume on P-3 programs. Additionally, the increase in operating profit included the favorable restructuring of a P-3 modification contract in 2009. Combat Aircraft operating profit decreased $22 million during the year primarily due to a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments on F-16 programs in 2009 compared to 2008 and lower volume 41 Table of Contents on other combat aircraft programs. These decreases more than offset increased operating profit resulting from higher volume and improved performance on the F-35 program and an increase in the level of favorable performance adjustments on the F-22 program in 2009 compared to 2008. Operating profit for the segment decreased 3% in 2008 compared to 2007. Operating profit declines in Combat Aircraft partially were offset by increases in Other Aeronautics Programs and Air Mobility. In Combat Aircraft, operating profit declined $86 million mainly due to lower volume on F-16 programs and lower volume and the decline in 2008 of the amount of favorable inception-to-date performance adjustments on the F-22 program. There was a $34 million increase in Other Aeronautics Programs, which mainly was due to higher volume in sustainment services activities that partially was offset by a decrease in operating profit due to performance on a P-3 modification contract. In Air Mobility, operating profit increased $13 million mainly due to higher volume and improved performance on C-130 support activities, which more than offset a decline on C-5 programs. Backlog decreased in 2009 compared to 2008 mainly due to sales exceeding orders on the F-22 and F-35 programs, which partially were offset by orders exceeding sales on the C-130J and C-5 programs. Backlog increased in 2008 as compared to 2007 primarily due to increased orders on the C-130J and F-35 programs, which were partially offset by declines resulting from sales volume on the F-22 program. Electronic Systems Electronic Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2009 2008 2007 Net sales $ 12,204 $ 11,620 $ 11,143 Operating profit 1,595 1,508 1,410 Backlog at year-end 21,900 22,500 21,200 Net sales for Electronic Systems increased by 5% in 2009 compared to 2008. During the year, sales increased in all three lines of business. The increase in sales of $394 million at Missiles & Fire Control (M&FC) primarily was due to growth on tactical missile programs and fire control systems. Platforms & Training (P&T) sales increased $122 million, primarily due to growth on simulation and training activities partially offset by lower volume on platform integration activities. The increase in simulation and training also included sales from the first quarter 2009 acquisition of Universal Systems and Technology, Inc. The increase in sales of $67 million at Maritime Systems & Sensors (MS2) mainly was due to higher volume on radar systems, surface naval warfare, and tactical systems programs, which partially were offset by a decline in integrated defense technologies. Net sales for Electronic Systems increased by 4% in 2008 compared to 2007. Sales increases in M&FC and MS2 more than offset a decline in P&T. M&FC sales increased $327 million mainly due to higher volume on fire control and tactical missile programs. MS2 sales grew $189 million primarily due to higher volume on integrated defense technology, undersea warfare and radar systems activities. The decline of $39 million in P&T sales mainly was due to lower volume on platform integration activities. Operating profit for the segment increased 6% in 2009 compared to 2008. In 2009, increases in operating profit at M&FC and P&T more than offset declines at MS2. Operating profit increased $114 million at M&FC mainly due to higher volume and improved performance on fire control systems and tactical missile programs. The increase in operating profit of $40 million at P&T primarily was due to higher volume and improved performance on simulation and training activities. Additionally, the increase included a benefit recognized in 2009 from favorably resolving a simulation and training contract matter. These increases partially were offset by lower volume on platform integration activities and a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments on distribution technology programs in 2009 compared to 2008. There was a $67 million decrease in operating profit at MS2, which primarily was attributable to lower volume on integrated defense technology programs and a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments on tactical systems, integrated defense technology, and undersea warfare programs in 2009 compared to 2008. Operating profit for the segment increased by 7% in 2008 compared to 2007. In 2008, operating profit increases at M&FC and MS2 more than offset a decrease at P&T. Operating profit increased $60 million at M&FC mainly due to improved performance on air defense programs and higher volume on tactical missile and fire control programs. There was a $71 million increase in operating profit at MS2, which mainly was attributable to higher volume and improved performance on integrated defense technology, surface naval warfare, undersea warfare, and radar systems programs. P&T operating profit declined $33 million primarily due to performance on platform integration activities. 42 Table of Contents Backlog decreased in 2009 compared to 2008 due to the U.S. Government exercise of the termination for convenience clause on the VH-71 Presidential Helicopter Program at P&T, which resulted in a $985 million reduction in orders. This decline more than offset increased orders on integrated defense technology and tactical system programs at MS2, air defense programs at M&FC, and simulation and training activities at P&T. The increase in backlog during 2008 compared to 2007 resulted primarily from increased orders on surface naval warfare programs at MS2 and on tactical missile programs at M&FC. These increases partially were offset by declines in orders on integrated defense technology and tactical systems programs at MS2. Effective January 1, 2010, the ground vehicles line of business from the former Systems Integration Owego, which includes the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle program, was realigned as part of Lockheed Martin Missiles & Fire Control. Additionally, the remaining Systems Integration Owego businesses were realigned with the former Maritime Systems & Sensors line of business to form a new line of business, Mission Systems & Sensors. These changes had no impact on the segment operating results in 2009. Information Systems & Global Services As previously disclosed, effective January 1, 2009, IS&GS redefined its lines of business to better align the segment based on its core customers and business activities. The new lines of business are as follows: Civil supports civil agency customer missions; Defense supports defense customer missions; and Intelligence supports intelligence customer missions. The realignment had no impact on the segment operating results. The prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform to the new lines of business. IS&GS operating results included the following: (In millions) 2009 2008 2007 Net sales $ 12,130 $ 11,611 $ 10,213 Operating profit 1,011 1,076 949 Backlog at year-end 12,600 13,300 11,800 Net sales for IS&GS increased 4% in 2009 compared to 2008. Sales increases in Defense and Civil partially were offset by slight declines in Intelligence. Defense sales increased $338 million primarily due to higher volume on mission and combat systems activities and readiness and stability operations. Net sales at Civil increased by $197 million principally due to higher volume on enterprise civilian services, which more than offset lower volume on Pacific Architect & Engineers Inc. (PAE) programs. Intelligence sales declined slightly by $17 million mainly due to lower volume on enterprise integration activities. Net sales for IS&GS increased by 14% in 2008 compared to 2007. Sales increased in all three lines of business during the year. Defense sales increased $642 million principally due to higher volume on mission and combat systems activities and readiness and stability operations. Civil sales increased by $612 million primarily due to higher volume on enterprise civilian services and PAE programs. There was a $145 million increase in Intelligence sales, which mainly was due to higher volume on security solutions and enterprise integration activities. Operating profit for the segment decreased by 6% in 2009 compared to 2008. Operating profit declines in Civil and Intelligence more than offset growth in Defense. The decrease of $66 million in Civil operating profit primarily was attributable to lower volume and performance on PAE programs. The decline in Civil also included a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments on enterprise civilian services programs in 2009 compared to 2008. The decrease in operating profit of $35 million at Intelligence mainly was due to a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments on security solution activities in 2009 compared to 2008 and lower volume on enterprise integration activities. The increase in Defense operating profit of $15 million mainly was due to volume and improved performance in mission and combat systems and readiness and stability operations, which more than offset lower performance on global programs. Operating profit for the segment increased by 13% in 2008 compared to 2007. Operating profit increased in all three lines of business during the year. Civil operating profit increased by $59 million due to higher volume and improved performance on enterprise civilian services. Defense operating profit increased $39 million primarily due to volume and improved performance in readiness and stability operations. In Intelligence, operating profit increased by $14 million due to higher volume on enterprise integration activities. 43 Table of Contents Backlog decreased in 2009 compared to 2008 due to the U.S. Government exercise of the termination for convenience clause on the TSAT Mission Operations System (TMOS) contract at Defense, which resulted in a $1.6 billion reduction in orders. This decline more than offset increased orders on enterprise civilian services programs at Civil and on readiness and stability operations programs at Defense. The increase in backlog during 2008 compared to 2007 primarily was due to increased orders on enterprise civilian services programs at Civil and on mission and combat systems and readiness and stability operations programs at Defense. Space Systems Space Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2009 2008 2007 Net sales $ 8,654 $ 8,027 $ 8,203 Operating profit 972 953 856 Backlog at year-end 16,800 17,900 17,400 Net sales for Space Systems increased 8% in 2009 compared to 2008. During the year, sales growth at Satellites and Space Transportation more than offset a decline in Strategic & Defensive Missile Systems (S&DMS). The sales growth of $707 million in Satellites was due to higher volume in government satellite activities, which partially was offset by lower volume in commercial satellite activities. There was one commercial satellite delivery in 2009 and two deliveries in 2008. The increase in sales of $21 million in Space Transportation primarily was due to higher volume on the Orion program, which more than offset a decline in the space shuttle external tank program. There was one commercial launch in both 2009 and 2008. S&DMS sales decreased by $102 million mainly due to lower volume on defensive missile programs, which more than offset growth in strategic missile programs. Net sales for Space Systems decreased 2% in 2008 compared to 2007. Sales declines in Satellites partially were offset by growth in Space Transportation. In Satellites, sales declined $579 million due to lower volume in both commercial and government satellite activities. There were two commercial satellite deliveries during 2008, compared to four in 2007. Space Transportation sales increased $427 million primarily due to higher volume on the Orion program. Operating profit for the segment increased 2% in 2009 compared to 2008. During the year, operating profit growth at Satellites more than offset declines at Space Transportation and S&DMS. In Satellites, the operating profit increase of $88 million mainly was due to higher volume on government satellite activities, which partially was offset by lower volume in commercial satellite activities. The decrease of $46 million in Space Transportation operating profit mainly was attributable to the absence in 2009 of a benefit recognized in 2008 from the successful negotiations of a terminated commercial launch vehicle contract, lower volume on the space shuttle external tank program, and lower equity earnings in 2009 on the ULA joint venture. The decrease in S&DMS operating profit of $19 million primarily was attributable to a lower volume on defensive missile programs and a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments in 2009 compared to 2008 on strategic missile programs. Total equity earnings recognized by Space Systems, which includes ULA and USA, represented 22% of the segment operating profit in 2009 compared to 24% in 2008. Operating profit increased by 11% in 2008 compared to 2007. The increase in operating profit was due to Space Transportation, which partially was offset by a decline in Satellites. In Space Transportation, the $135 million increase mainly was attributable to higher equity earnings on the ULA joint venture, volume on the Orion program, and the results from successful negotiations of a terminated commercial launch service contract in the first quarter of 2008. The improvement in ULA earnings also reflects the absence in 2008 of a charge recognized in the third quarter of 2007 for asset impairment on the Delta II medium lift launch vehicles. In Satellites, operating profit declined by $42 million during the year due to lower volume and performance on certain government satellite programs. Total equity earnings recognized by Space Systems represented 24% of the segment operating profit in 2008 compared to 16% in 2007 The decrease in backlog during 2009 compared to 2008 was primarily attributable to declines in orders and higher sales volume on the Orion program in Space Transportation and on government satellite programs in Satellites. The increase in backlog during 2008 as compared to 2007 was primarily due to increased orders on government satellite programs and on the Orion program. 44 Table of Contents Unallocated Corporate Income (Expense), Net The following table shows the components of unallocated Corporate income (expense), net. (In millions) 2009 2008 2007 FAS/CAS pension adjustment $ (456 ) $ 128 $ (58 ) Items not considered in segment operating performance 193 71 Stock compensation expense (154 ) (155 ) (149 ) Other, net (79 ) (5 ) (28 ) $ (689 ) $ 161 $ (164 ) The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension expense calculated in accordance with GAAP and pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS. Because the CAS expense is recovered through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore recognized in a particular segment net sales and cost of sales, the results of operations of our segments only include pension expense as determined and funded in accordance with CAS rules. Accordingly, the FAS/CAS adjustment is not included in segment operating results, but is included in the reconciliation of total segment operating profit to consolidated operating profit under GAAP. The following table shows the CAS funding that is included as expense in the segments operating results, the related FAS pension expense, and the resulting FAS/CAS pension adjustment: (In millions) 2009 2008 2007 FAS pension expense $ (1,036 ) $ (462 ) $ (687 ) Less: CAS expense and funding (580 ) (590 ) (629 ) FAS/CAS pension adjustment income (expense) $ (456 ) $ 128 $ (58 ) The FAS pension expense increased in 2009 compared to 2008 due to the 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate and amortization of the actuarial losses incurred in 2008 as a result of the significant negative return on plan assets compared to our 8.5% long-term rate of return assumption (see the related discussion in Critical Accounting Policies under the caption Postretirement Benefit Plans ). The FAS pension expense decreased in 2008 compared to 2007 due to a 50 basis point increase in the discount rate and other factors such as the effects of the actual return on plan assets at the respective plan measurement dates through December 31, 2007. Certain items are excluded from segment results as part of senior management evaluation of segment operating performance consistent with the management approach permitted by GAAP. For example, gains and losses related to the disposition of businesses or investments managed by Corporate, as well as certain other Corporate activities, are not considered by management in evaluating the operating performance of business segments. There were no such items in 2009; however, for purposes of segment reporting, the following items were included in unallocated Corporate income (expense), net for 2008 and 2007: (In millions, except per share data) Operating Profit Net Earnings Earnings Per Share Year ended December 31, 2008 Recognition of deferred gain on LKEI and ILS $ 108 $ 70 $ 0.17 Elimination of reserves associated with various land sales 85 56 0.14 $ 193 $ 126 $ 0.31 Year ended December 31, 2007 Gain on sale of interest in Comsat International $ 25 $ 16 $ 0.04 Gain on sale of land in California 25 16 0.04 Reversal of legal reserves due to settlement 21 14 0.03 $ 71 $ 46 $ 0.11 The change in the Other, net component of unallocated Corporate income (expense), net, between the periods primarily was due to fluctuations in expense associated with a number of Corporate activities. 45 Table of Contents Liquidity and Cash Flows Our access to capital resources that provide liquidity has not been materially affected by the adverse changes in economic and market conditions over the past two years. We continually monitor changes in such conditions so that we can timely respond to any related developments. We have generated strong operating cash flows, which have been the primary source of funding for our operations, debt service and repayments, capital expenditures, share repurchases, dividends, acquisitions, required retirement plan funding, and certain other discretionary funding needs. We have accessed the capital markets on limited occasions, as needed and when opportunistic, including the issuance of debt securities totaling $1.5 billion in 2009 and $500 million in 2008. We expect our cash from operations to continue to be sufficient to support our operations and anticipated capital expenditures. We have financing resources available (see discussion under Capital Resources) to fund potential cash outflows that are less predictable or more discretionary. We have access to the credit markets, if needed, for liquidity or general corporate purposes, including letters of credit to support customer advance payments and for other trade finance purposes ( e.g. , guaranteeing our performance on particular contracts). Cash received from customers, either from the payment of invoices for work performed or for advances in excess of costs incurred, is our primary source of cash. We generally do not begin work on contracts until funding is appropriated by the customer. Billing timetables and payment terms on our contracts vary based on a number of factors, including the contract type. For example, contracts may be cost reimbursable, time and materials, or fixed price. We generally bill and collect cash more frequently under cost reimbursable and time and materials contracts, which together represent approximately 65% of the revenues we recorded in 2009, as we are authorized to bill as the costs are incurred or work is performed. In contrast to cost reimbursable contracts, for fixed price contracts we generally do not bill until milestones, including deliveries, are achieved. A number of our contracts may provide for performance-based payments which allow us to bill and collect cash prior to completing the work. Fixed price contracts represented approximately 35% of the revenues we recorded in 2009. The majority of our capital expenditures for 2009 and those planned for 2010 can be divided into the categories of facilities infrastructure, equipment, and information technology (IT). Expenditures for facilities infrastructure and equipment are generally incurred to support new and existing programs across all of our business segments. For example, we have projects underway in our Aeronautics business segment for facilities and equipment to support production of the F-35 combat aircraft. In addition, we have projects underway to modernize certain of our facilities, some of which are as much as 50 years old. We also incur capital expenditures for IT to support programs and general enterprise IT infrastructure. We have a balanced cash deployment and disciplined growth strategy to enhance shareholder value and position ourselves to take advantage of new business opportunities when they arise. Consistent with that strategy, we have invested in our business ( e.g. , capital expenditures, independent research and development), made selective acquisitions of businesses, repurchased shares, increased our dividends, and managed our debt levels. The following provides an overview of our execution of this strategy. Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $1.2 billion to $3.2 billion in 2009 as compared to 2008. The decrease primarily was attributable to an increase in discretionary contributions related to our qualified defined benefit pension plans, which were $1,482 million in 2009 and $109 million in 2008, a $193 million decline in net earnings, and a decrease in cash provided by operating working capital of $147 million. This decrease partially was offset by the effects of an increase in the FAS pension expense, which was $1,036 million in 2009 and $462 million in 2008, and lower net tax payments of $319 million compared to 2008. The decline in cash provided by operating working capital primarily was due to growth of receivables on various programs in the Platforms and Training line of business at Electronic Systems and an increase in inventories on Combat Aircraft programs at Aeronautics, which partially were offset by increases in customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred on Government Satellite programs at Space and the timing of accounts payable activities. Operating working capital accounts consist of receivables, inventories, accounts payable, and customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $183 million to $4.4 billion in 2008 as compared to 2007. The increase primarily was attributable to an increase in net earnings of $184 million, a decrease of $429 million in total contributions related to our qualified defined benefit pension plans and retiree medical and life insurance plans, and a $100 million dividend received from ULA. This increase was offset partially by a $291 million decrease in cash provided by 46 Table of Contents working capital and higher net tax payments of $103 million compared to 2007. The decline in operating working capital primarily was due to an increase in inventories on Combat Aircraft programs at Aeronautics and a decrease in customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred on various programs in the Missiles & Fire Control line of business at Electronic Systems. Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities (In millions) Investing Activities Capital expenditures The majority of our capital expenditures relate to facilities infrastructure and equipment that are incurred to support new and existing programs across all of our business segments. We also incur capital expenditures for information technology (IT) to support programs and general enterprise IT infrastructure. Capital expenditures for property, plant and equipment amounted to $852 million in 2009, $926 million in 2008, and $940 million in 2007. We expect that our annual capital expenditures over the next three years, which are expected to be $1.0 billion or more per year, will be sufficient to support the expected growth in our business and to support specific program requirements. Acquisitions, divestitures and other activities We have a process to selectively identify businesses for acquisition that meet our strategic, operational, and financial targets; help build a balanced portfolio; and provide disciplined growth. As disclosed under the caption Acquisition and Divestiture Activities, we paid $435 million in 2009 for acquisition activities, including the acquisitions of businesses and investments in affiliates, compared with $233 million in 2008 and $337 million in 2007. There were no material divestiture activities in 2009 and 2008. In 2007, we received proceeds of $26 million from the sale of our remaining interest in Comsat International. Financing Activities Share activity and dividends Cash received from the issuance of our common stock in connection with stock option exercises during 2009, 2008, and 2007 totaled $40 million, $250 million, and $350 million. Those activities resulted in the issuance of 1.0 million shares, 4.7 million shares, and 7.1 million shares during the respective periods. During 2009, 2008, and 2007, we used cash of $1,851 million, $2,931 million, and $2,127 million for common share repurchase activity (see Note 11). Our share repurchase program authorizes the repurchase of up to 178.0 million shares of our common stock from time-to-time at management discretion, including 20.0 million of additional shares our Board authorized for repurchase in 2009. As of December 31, 2009, we had repurchased a total of 149.2 million shares under the program, and there remained approximately 28.8 million shares that may be repurchased in the future. The payment of dividends on our common shares is one of the key components of our balanced cash deployment strategy. Shareholders were paid cash dividends of $908 million in 2009, $737 million in 2008, and $615 million in 2007. We have increased our quarterly dividend rate in each of the last three years. We declared quarterly dividends: in 2009 of $0.57 per share during each of the first three quarters and $0.63 per share for the last quarter; in 2008 of $0.42 per share during each of the first three quarters and $0.57 per share for the last quarter; and in 2007 of $0.35 per share during each of the first three quarters and $0.42 per share for the last quarter. Issuance and repayment of long-term debt We issued a total of $1.5 billion of long-term notes in 2009 and $500 million of long-term notes in 2008. In 2009, we paid $242 million in repayments of long-term debt based on scheduled 47 Table of Contents maturities. In 2008, we paid a total of $1.0 billion representing the principal amount of our floating rate convertible debentures that were delivered for conversion or otherwise redeemed (see Note 9). We also paid another $103 million during 2008 related to other repayments of long-term debt based on scheduled maturities, compared to $32 million in debt repayments in 2007. Capital Structure and Resources At December 31, 2009, we held cash and cash equivalents of approximately $2.4 billion and short-term investments of $346 million. Our long-term debt, net of unamortized discounts, amounted to $5.1 billion. As of the end of 2009, our long-term debt bears interest at fixed rates and mainly is in the form of publicly-issued notes and debentures. In November 2009, we issued a total of $1.5 billion of long-term notes in a registered public offering (see Note 9), $900 million of which are due in 2019 and have a fixed coupon interest rate of 4.25%, and $600 million of which are due in 2039 and have a fixed coupon interest rate of 5.50%. In 2008, we issued $500 million of long-term notes in a registered public offering (see Note 9) that are due in 2013 and have a fixed coupon rate of 4.12%. In August 2008, all of our $1.0 billion of floating rate convertible debentures were delivered for conversion or otherwise redeemed, and we issued 5.0 million shares of our common stock to satisfy the related conversion obligations of $571 million in excess of the principal amount (see Note 9). Our stockholders equity amounted to $4.1 billion at December 31, 2009, an increase of $1.3 billion from December 31, 2008. The increase primarily was due to net earnings of $3.0 billion; the annual remeasurement of the funded status of our postretirement benefit plans at December 31 (see Note 10), which decreased the accumulated other comprehensive loss by $495 million; and employee stock activity of $445 million. These increases partially were offset by the repurchase of 24.9 million common shares for $1.9 billion and payment of $908 million of dividends during the year. As we repurchase our common shares, we reduce common stock for the $1 of par value of the shares repurchased, with the remainder of the purchase price over par value recorded as a reduction of additional paid-in capital. Due to the volume of repurchases made under our share repurchase program, additional paid-in capital was reduced to zero, with the remainder of the excess of purchase price over par value of $1.4 billion recorded as a reduction of retained earnings. Our debt-to-total capital ratio was 55% at December 31, 2009, down from 57% at December 31, 2008. The decrease from 2008 to 2009 primarily was attributable to the increase in stockholders equity discussed above, which was partially offset by the issuance of long-term notes in November 2009. Our debt-to-total capital ratio was 57% for 2008 compared to 31% in 2007. This increase from 2007 to 2008 primarily was attributable to the decrease in stockholders equity through the remeasurement of the postretirement benefit plans which increased the accumulated other comprehensive loss by $7.25 billion, the repurchase of 29 million common shares for $2.9 billion, and payment of $737 million of dividends during 2008. These decreases partially were offset by net earnings of $3.2 billion and employee stock activity of $746 million. Debt-to-Total Capital Ratio Return on invested capital (ROIC) declined by 180 basis points during 2009 to 19.9%. We define ROIC as net earnings plus after-tax interest expense divided by average invested capital (stockholders equity plus debt), after adjusting stockholders equity by adding back amounts related to postretirement benefit plans. We believe that reporting ROIC provides investors with greater visibility into how effectively we use the capital invested in our operations. We use ROIC as one of the inputs in our evaluation of multi-year investment decisions and as a long-term performance measure. We also use ROIC as a factor in evaluating management performance under certain of our incentive compensation plans. 48 Table of Contents ROIC is not a measure of financial performance under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, and may not be defined and calculated by other companies in the same manner. ROIC should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net earnings as an indicator of performance. See Consolidated Financial Data Five Year Summary on page 24 of this Form 10-K for additional information concerning how we calculate ROIC. Return on Invested Capital Ratio At December 31, 2009, we had in place a $1.5 billion revolving credit facility with a group of banks, which expires in June 2012. There were no borrowings outstanding under the facility at December 31, 2009. Borrowings under the credit facility would be unsecured and bear interest at rates based, at our option, on the Eurodollar rate or a bank defined Base Rate. Each bank obligation to make loans under the credit facility is subject to, among other things, our compliance with various representations, warranties and covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets, and a covenant not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio. The leverage ratio covenant excludes the adjustments recognized in stockholders equity related to our postretirement benefit plans. We have agreements in place with banking institutions to provide for the issuance of commercial paper. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding at December 31, 2009. If we were to issue commercial paper, the borrowings would be supported by the $1.5 billion revolving credit facility. We have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission to provide for the issuance of an indeterminate amount of debt securities. As described above, we issued $1.5 billion of long-term notes under this shelf registration in November 2009 for general corporate purposes. We actively seek to finance our business in a manner that preserves financial flexibility while minimizing borrowing costs to the extent practicable. We review changes in financial market, and economic conditions to manage the types, amounts, and maturities of our indebtedness. We may at times refinance existing indebtedness, vary our mix of variable-rate and fixed-rate debt, or seek alternative financing sources for our cash and operational needs. Contractual Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements At December 31, 2009, we had contractual commitments to repay debt, make payments under operating leases, settle obligations related to agreements to purchase goods and services, and settle tax and other liabilities. Capital lease obligations were negligible. Payments due under these obligations and commitments are as follows: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Total Less Than 1 Year Years 2 and 3 Years 4 and 5 After 5 Years Long-term debt (a) $ 5,403 $ $ $ 650 $ 4,753 Interest payments 5,817 338 677 626 4,176 Other liabilities 2,253 494 460 232 1,067 Operating lease obligations 1,459 314 494 296 355 Purchase obligations: Operating activities 21,049 11,932 7,672 1,380 65 Capital expenditures 230 169 61 Total contractual cash obligations $ 36,211 $ 13,247 $ 9,364 $ 3,184 $ 10,416 (a) The total amount of long-term debt excludes the unamortized discount of $351 million (see Note 9). 49 Table of Contents Generally, our long-term debt obligations are subject to, along with other things, compliance with certain covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets. Interest payments include interest related to the outstanding debt through maturity. Amounts related to other liabilities represent the contractual obligations for certain long-term liabilities recorded as of December 31, 2009. Such amounts mainly include expected payments under deferred compensation plans, non-qualified pension plans, environmental liabilities, and business acquisition agreements. Obligations related to environmental liabilities represent our estimate of obligations for sites at which we are performing remediation activities, excluding amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Government in its capacity as a potentially responsible party. The amounts also include liabilities related to tax positions we have taken (see Note 8). We estimated the timing of tax payments based on the expected completion of the related examinations by the applicable taxing authorities. Purchase obligations related to operating activities include agreements and requirements contracts that give the supplier recourse to us for cancellation or nonperformance under the contract or contain terms that would subject us to liquidated damages. Such agreements and contracts may, for example, be related to direct materials, obligations to subcontractors, and outsourcing arrangements. Total purchase obligations in the preceding table include approximately $19.5 billion related to contractual commitments entered into as a result of contracts we have with our U.S. Government customers. However, the U.S. Government would be required to pay us for any costs we incur relative to these commitments if they were to terminate the related contracts for convenience under the FAR, subject to available funding. For example, if we had commitments to purchase goods and services that were entered into as a result of a specific contract we received from our U.S. Government customer and the customer terminated the contract for its convenience, any amounts we would be required to pay to settle the related commitments, as well as amounts previously incurred, would generally be reimbursed by the customer in accordance with the FAR. This would also be true in cases where we perform subcontract work for a prime contractor under a U.S. Government contract. The termination for convenience language may also be included in contracts with foreign, state, and local governments. We also have contracts with customers that do not include termination for convenience provisions, including contracts with commercial customers. Purchase obligations in the preceding table for capital expenditures generally include amounts for facilities and equipment related to customer contracts. We also may enter into industrial cooperation agreements, sometimes referred to as offset agreements, as a condition to obtaining orders for our products and services from certain customers in foreign countries. These agreements are designed to enhance the social and economic environment of the foreign country by requiring the contractor to promote investment in the country. Offset agreements may be satisfied through activities that do not require us to use cash, including transferring technology, providing manufacturing and other consulting support to in-country projects, and the purchase by third parties ( e.g., our vendors) of supplies from in-country vendors. These agreements may also be satisfied through our use of cash for such activities as purchasing supplies from in-country vendors, providing financial support for in-country projects, and building or leasing facilities for in-country operations. We typically do not commit to offset agreements until orders for our products or services are definitive. The amounts ultimately applied against our offset agreements are based on negotiations with the customer and typically require cash outlays that represent only a fraction of the original amount in the offset agreement. At December 31, 2009, we had outstanding offset agreements totaling $10.0 billion, primarily related to our Aeronautics segment, some of which extend through 2025. To the extent we have entered into purchase obligations at December 31, 2009 that also satisfy offset agreements, those amounts are included in the preceding table. Offset programs usually extend over several years and may provide for penalties in the event we fail to perform in accordance with offset requirements. We have historically not been required to pay any such penalties. In connection with the closing of the transaction to form ULA on December 1, 2006, we and The Boeing Company (Boeing) each committed to providing up to $25 million in additional capital contributions and $200 million in other financial support to ULA, as required. The non-capital financial support is required to be made in the form of a revolving credit facility between us and ULA or guarantees of ULA financing with third parties, in either case to the extent necessary for ULA to meet its working capital needs. We have agreed to provide this support for at least five years from the closing date of the transaction, and would expect to fund our requirements with cash on hand. To satisfy our non-capital financial support commitment, we and Boeing put into place at closing a revolving credit agreement with ULA, under which no amounts have been drawn. As of December 31, 2009, we and Boeing each had provided the $25 million of funding to ULA under the additional capital contribution commitment. Of that amount, $22 million was contributed in the second quarter of 2009, prior to which we each received a dividend from ULA in a like amount. Other than the $22 million contribution, we did not provide further 50 Table of Contents funding to ULA during 2009. In 2008, we and Boeing each received a $100 million dividend payment. Prior to distribution of that dividend, we, Boeing and ULA entered into an agreement whereby, if ULA does not have sufficient cash resources and/or credit capacity to make payments under the inventory supply agreement it has with Boeing, both we and Boeing would provide to ULA, in the form of an additional capital contribution, the level of funding required for ULA to make such payments. Such capital contributions would not exceed the aggregate amount of the dividends we received through June 1, 2009, which totaled $122 million. We currently believe that ULA will have sufficient operating cash flows and credit capacity to meet its obligations such that we would not be required to make a contribution under this agreement. In addition, both we and Boeing have cross-indemnified ULA related to certain financial support arrangements ( e.g. , letters of credit, surety bonds, or foreign exchange contracts provided by either party) and guarantees by us and Boeing of the performance and financial obligations of ULA under certain launch service contracts. We believe ULA will be able to fully perform its obligations, as it has done through December 31, 2009, and that it will not be necessary to make payments under the cross-indemnities. We have entered into standby letter of credit agreements and other arrangements with financial institutions and customers mainly relating to advances received from customers and/or the guarantee of future performance on some of our contracts. In some cases, we may also guarantee the contractual performance of third parties such as joint venture partners. At December 31, 2009, we had the following outstanding letters of credit, surety bonds, and guarantees: Commitment Expiration By Period (In millions) Total Commitment Less Than 1 Year (a) Years 2 and 3 (a) Years 4 and 5 (a) After 5 Years (a) Standby letters of credit $ 2,593 $ 2,165 $ 355 $ 56 $ 17 Surety bonds 408 399 9 Guarantees 559 41 8 57 453 Total commitments $ 3,560 $ 2,605 $ 372 $ 113 $ 470 (a) Approximately $2,045 million, $180 million, $6 million, and $1 million of standby letters of credit in the Less Than 1 Year, Years 2 and 3, Years 4 and 5, and After 5 Years periods, and approximately $49 million and $1 million of surety bonds in the Less Than 1 Year and Years 2 and 3 periods, are expected to renew for additional periods until completion of the contractual obligation. Included in the table above is approximately $383 million representing letter of credit amounts for which related obligations or liabilities are also recorded on the Balance Sheet, either as reductions of inventories, as customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred, or as other liabilities. Approximately $1.8 billion of the standby letters of credit were issued to secure advance payments received under an F-16 contract from an international customer. These letters of credit are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance, and the amount available will be reduced as certain events occur throughout the period of performance in accordance with the contract terms. Similar to the letters of credit for the F-16 contract, other letters of credit and surety bonds are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance. Acquisition and Divestiture Activities We continuously strive to strengthen our portfolio of products and services to meet the current and future needs of our customers. We accomplish this not only internally, through our independent research and development activities, but also through acquisitions. We selectively pursue the acquisition of businesses and investments that complement our current portfolio and allow access to new customers or technologies. We have made a number of such niche acquisitions of businesses and investments in affiliates during the past several years. Conversely, we may also explore the divestiture of businesses, investments, and real estate. If we were to decide to sell any such assets, the resulting gains, if any, would be recorded when the transactions are completed and losses, if any, would be recorded when the value of the related asset is determined to be impaired. Acquisitions In 2009, we used approximately $435 million for acquisition activities, including the acquisitions of businesses and investments in affiliates. We accounted for acquisitions of businesses in 2009 under the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that all of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be measured and recorded at their acquisition-date fair values. Acquisition activities in 2009 included the following, among others: Universal Systems & Technology, Inc., which provides interactive training and simulation, homeland security, and technical solutions to various U.S. and international government agencies; and 51 Table of Contents Gyrocam Systems LLC, which develops and supplies gyrostabilized optical surveillance systems and sustainment field services, primarily to the U.S. military. In 2008, we used approximately $233 million for acquisition activities, including, among others, Eagle Group International, LLC, which provides logistics, information technology, training, and healthcare services to the U.S. Department of Defense. In 2007, we used approximately $337 million for acquisition activities, including an additional contribution of $177 million related to our investment in ULA (see Note 14). Those activities also included the acquisition of, among others, Management Systems Designers, Inc., a provider of information technology (IT) and scientific solutions supporting government life science, national security, and other civil agency missions. In each year, the amounts used for acquisitions included certain payments related to businesses acquired in prior years. In 2008 and 2007, we accounted for the acquisitions under the purchase method of accounting, and therefore recorded purchase accounting adjustments by allocating the purchase price to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. Acquisitions were not material to our consolidated results of operations in 2009, 2008, or 2007. Divestitures Divestiture activities in 2009 were not material and there were no divestiture activities in 2008. During 2007, we monetized certain of our equity investments and real estate by divesting the following: Our remaining 20% interest in Comsat International, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $25 million in other income (expense), net, and increased net earnings by $16 million ($0.04 per share); and Certain land in California, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $25 million in other income (expense), net, and increased net earnings by $16 million ($0.04 per share). Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure of Market Risk We maintain active relationships with a broad and diverse group of domestic and international financial institutions. We believe that they provide us with sufficient access to the general and trade credit we require to conduct business. We continue to closely monitor the financial market environment and actively manage counterparty exposure to minimize the potential impact from adverse developments with any single credit provider while ensuring availability of, and access to, sufficient credit resources. Our main exposure to market risk relates to interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates, and market prices on certain equity securities. Our financial instruments that are subject to interest rate risk principally include fixed-rate long-term debt. At December 31, 2009, the estimated fair value of our long-term debt instruments was approximately $5.9 billion, compared with a carrying value of $5.4 billion, excluding the $351 million unamortized discount. We may use derivative financial instruments to manage our exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates. Our foreign currency exchange contracts, the majority of which qualify for hedge accounting treatment, hedge the fluctuations in cash flows associated with firm commitments or specific anticipated transactions contracted in foreign currencies. Related gains and losses on these contracts, to the extent they are effective hedges, are recognized in income at the same time the hedged transaction is recognized in income. To the extent the hedges are ineffective, gains and losses on the contracts are recognized in the current period. At December 31, 2009, the net fair value of foreign currency exchange contracts outstanding was a liability of $2 million (see Note 1 under the caption Derivative financial instruments ). We had no interest rate derivatives outstanding at December 31, 2009. We evaluate the credit quality of potential counterparties to derivative transactions and only enter into agreements with those deemed to have minimal credit risk at the time the agreements are executed. Our foreign currency exchange hedge portfolio is diversified across several banks. We periodically monitor changes to counterparty credit quality as well as our concentration of credit exposure to individual counterparties. We do not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes. We maintain a Rabbi Trust that includes investments to fund certain of our non-qualified deferred compensation plans. As of December 31, 2009, investments in the Rabbi Trust totaled $757 million and are reflected at fair value on our Balance Sheet in other assets. The Rabbi Trust holds investments in marketable equity securities and fixed-income securities that are exposed 52 Table of Contents to price changes and changes in interest rates. Changes in the value of the Rabbi Trust are recognized on our Statement of Earnings in other non-operating income (expense), net. During the year ended December 31, 2009, we recorded earnings totaling $110 million related to the increase in the value of the Rabbi Trust assets. We also contributed $171 million to the Rabbi Trust in 2009. A portion of the liabilities associated with the deferred compensation plans supported by the Rabbi Trust is also impacted by changes in the market price of our common stock and certain market indices. Changes in the value of the deferred compensation liabilities are recognized on our Statement of Earnings in unallocated Corporate costs. The current portion of the deferred compensation plan liabilities is on our Balance Sheet in salaries, benefits, and payroll taxes, and the non-current portion of the liability is on our Balance Sheet in other liabilities. The resulting change in the value of the liabilities has the effect of partially offsetting the impact of changes in the value of the Rabbi Trust. During the year ended December 31, 2009, we recorded expense of $45 million related to the increase in the value of the deferred compensation liabilities. Recent Accounting Pronouncements There are a number of new accounting pronouncements and interpretations that are not effective until after December 31, 2009 and may impact our financial statements and disclosures. See Note 1 under the caption Recent accounting pronouncements for more information. Controls and Procedures We maintain disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, which are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our periodic filings with the SEC is reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules and forms, and to provide reasonable assurance that assets are safeguarded and transactions are properly executed and recorded. Our disclosure controls and procedures are also designed to ensure that information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO), as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. In designing and evaluating such controls and procedures, we recognize that any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives, and management necessarily is required to use its judgment in evaluating the cost-benefit relationship of possible controls and procedures. Also, we have investments in certain unconsolidated entities. As we do not control or manage these entities (in some cases, we are only a passive equity holder), our controls and procedures with respect to those entities are necessarily substantially more limited than those we maintain with respect to our consolidated subsidiaries. We routinely review our system of internal control over financial reporting and make changes to our processes and systems to improve controls and increase efficiency, while ensuring that we maintain an effective internal control environment. Changes may include such activities as implementing new, more efficient systems, consolidating the activities of two or more business units, and migrating certain processes to our Shared Services centers. In addition, when we acquire new businesses, we review the controls and procedures of the acquired business as part of our integration activities. We performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, as of December 31, 2009. The evaluation was performed with the participation of senior management of each business segment and key Corporate functions, and under the supervision of the CEO and CFO. Based on this evaluation, the CEO and CFO concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were operating and effective as of December 31, 2009 to provide reasonable assurance that information is communicated to management to allow for timely decisions regarding required disclosure, assets are safeguarded, and transactions are properly executed and recorded. Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. During 2009, our management performed a separate evaluation of our internal control over financial reporting in accordance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, including performing self-assessment and monitoring procedures. Based on those activities and other evaluation procedures, our management, including the CEO and CFO, concluded that internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2009. Management report on our financial statements and internal control over financial reporting appears on page 54. In addition, the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting was audited by our independent registered public accounting firm. Their report appears on page 55. There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the most recently completed fiscal quarter that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 
