CIK: 936468
Company Name: LOCKHEED MARTIN CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-02-26


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Financial Section Roadmap The financial section of our Form 10-K includes management discussion and analysis, our consolidated financial statements, the notes to those financial statements and a five year summary of financial information. We have prepared the following summary, or roadmap, to assist in your review of the financial section. It is designed to give you an overview of our Company and summarize some of the more important activities and events that occurred this year. Our Business Lockheed Martin is a global security company that principally is engaged in the research, design, development, manufacture, integration, and sustainment of advanced technology systems and products. We provide a broad range of management, engineering, technical, scientific, logistic, and information services. We serve both domestic and international customers with products and services that have defense, civil and commercial applications, with our principal customers being agencies of the U.S. Government. In 2008, 2007 and 2006, 84% of our net sales were made to the U.S. Government, either as a prime contractor or as a subcontractor. Our U.S. Government sales were made to both Department of Defense (DoD) and non-DoD agencies. Of the remaining 16% of net sales, approximately 13% related to sales to foreign government customers (including foreign military sales funded, in whole or in part, by the U.S. Government), with the remainder attributable to commercial and other customers. Our main areas of focus are in defense, space, intelligence, homeland security, and government information technology. We operate in four principal business segments: Electronic Systems, Information Systems & Global Services (IS&GS), Aeronautics, and Space Systems. As a lead systems integrator, our products and services range from electronics and information systems (including integrated net-centric solutions), to missiles, aircraft, and spacecraft. We organize our business segments based on the nature of the products and services offered. Financial Section Overview The financial section includes the following: Management discussion and analysis, or MD&A (pages 33 through 59) provides our management view about industry trends, risks, uncertainties, accounting policies that we view as critical in light of our business, our results of operations (including discussion of the key performance drivers of each of our business segments), our financial position, cash flows, commitments and contingencies, important events, transactions that have occurred over the last three years, and forward-looking information, as appropriate. Reports related to the financial statements and internal control over financial reporting (pages 60 through 62) include the following: A report from management indicating our responsibility for financial reporting, the financial statements, and the system of internal control over financial reporting, including an assessment of the effectiveness of those controls; A report from Ernst & Young LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, which includes their opinion on the effectiveness of our system of internal control over financial reporting; and A report from Ernst & Young LLP which includes their opinion on the fair presentation of our financial statements based on their audits. Financial statements (pages 63 through 66) include our Consolidated Statements of Earnings, Cash Flows and Stockholders Equity for each of the last three years, and our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of the end of the last two years. Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Notes to the financial statements (pages 67 through 96) provide insight into and are an integral part of our financial statements. The notes contain explanations of our significant accounting policies, details about certain of the captions on the financial statements, information about significant events or transactions that have occurred, discussions about legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies, and selected financial information relating to our business segments. The notes to the financial statements also are prepared in accordance with GAAP. 33 Table of Contents Highlights The financial section of our Form 10-K describes our ongoing operations, including discussions about particular lines of business or programs, our ability to finance our operating activities, trends and uncertainties in our industry, and how they might affect our future operations. We also discuss those items affecting our results that were not considered in senior management assessment of the operating performance of our business segments. We separately disclose these items to assist in your evaluation of our overall operating performance and financial condition of our consolidated company. We would like to draw your attention to the following items disclosed in this financial section and where you will find them: Topic Location(s) Critical accounting policies: Contract accounting/revenue recognition Page 38 and page 68 Postretirement benefit plans Page 39 and page 82 Environmental matters Page 42, page 68 and page 91 Goodwill Page 43 and page 68 Stock-based compensation Page 43, page 70 and page 88 Discussion of business segments Page 45 and page 73 Liquidity and cash flows Page 51 and page 65 Capital structure and resources Page 53, page 64, page 66 and page 87 Legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies Page 55 and page 90 Income taxes Page 70 and page 78 Industry Considerations U.S. Government Business Budget Priorities In these times of unprecedented economic uncertainty and market turmoil, developing and implementing spending, tax, and other initiatives to stimulate the faltering economy is at the forefront of the U.S. Government activities. We expect the new Obama Administration decisions regarding defense, homeland security, and other federal spending priorities, and the Congress reaction to the Administration proposals, to be balanced with the cost and impact of economic stimulus initiatives, particularly in the longer term. Spending priorities for fiscal year 2010 will be announced soon, with submission of a detailed President Budget Request for Fiscal Year 2010 and beyond expected by late April or early May of 2009. Although we believe some priorities will change, many of the investments and acquisitions we have made have been focused on aligning our businesses to address what we believe are the most enduring national imperatives and critical mission areas. But the possibility remains that one or more of our programs could be reduced, extended, or terminated as a result of the Administration assessment of priorities. Department of Defense Business The Department of Defense (DoD) has, for the past eight years, focused on sustainment of current military capabilities and modernization of our Armed Forces to deter and defeat current and future threats. The prior Administration primarily sought to fund the U.S. military missions in Iraq and Afghanistan and other unforeseeable contingency or peacekeeping operations through supplemental funding requests. This supplemental funding enabled the DoD to proceed with critical recapitalization and modernization programs in the base budget, rather than using base budget funds available for those programs to pay for the Iraq and Afghanistan missions and other unforeseen operations. While we expect to see continued support of such initiatives under the new Administration, other national priorities must also be addressed, most notably the current financial crisis. Initiatives to address economic stimulus will compete with other national priorities, such as defense and homeland security. In this period of transition, we expect the new Administration to look broadly across current programs and examine existing resources as part of its assessment of national priorities. Although the ultimate size of future defense budgets remains uncertain, current indications are that overall defense spending will continue to increase over the next few years, albeit at lower rates of growth. The DoD base budget for fiscal year 2009 provided mid-single-digit growth above prior year levels. Current estimates for the budget for fiscal year 2010 provide for growth of about 2% to 3% over 2009 levels. The Administration assessment likely will include focus on the level and composition of supplemental budget requests going forward. Although Congress has continued to express concern about the size of supplemental budget requests, funding for ongoing operations has not been significantly curtailed by Congress to date. We expect to see continuing pressure to reduce supplemental funding requests. 34 Table of Contents We believe our broad mix of programs and capabilities continues to position us favorably to support the current and future needs of the DoD. For example, the need for more affordable logistics and sustainment, expansive use of information technology and knowledge-based solutions, and vastly improved levels of network and cybersecurity, all appear to be national priorities. To meet these changing dynamics, we have been growing our portfolio of expertise, diversifying our business, and expanding systems integration skills into adjacent businesses and programs that include surface naval vessels, rotary wing aviation and land vehicles. We continue to produce the F-22 Raptor for the U.S. Air Force and will expand production of the C-130J Super Hercules tactical airlifter to meet U.S. Government and other demand. We also are preparing for increased production of the F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter for the U.S. Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and international partners. In the areas of space-based intelligence and information superiority, we have leadership positions on programs such as the Global Positioning Satellite program (GPS III), TSAT Mission Operations System (TMOS), Mobile User Objective System (MUOS), the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) system, the Space-Based Infrared System-High (SBIRS-H), and classified programs. Our products are represented in almost every aspect of land, sea, air and space-based missile defense, including the Aegis Weapon System program, the Patriot Advanced Capability (PAC-3) missile program, the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system, the Multiple Kill Vehicle (MKV) program, and the Medium Extended Air Defense System (MEADS). We continue to perform on contracts to develop and deliver essential munitions, missile, and other systems, such as Hellfire, Guided Multiple Launch Rocket Systems, and EQ-36 radar systems, to our warfighters. We are bringing our systems integration expertise, as well as our existing advanced technology products and services into adjacent military product lines, such as the Littoral Combat Ship, the VH-71 U.S. Presidential Helicopter, and the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle programs. We also have unmanned systems capabilities, including air, ground, and underwater systems. In the area of command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR) programs, our capabilities include the Air Operations Center Weapons System Integrator, the Airborne Maritime Fixed Joint Tactical Radio System, the Warfighter Information Network Tactical, the Combatant Commanders Integrated Command and Control System, and the Global Communications Support System Air Force. We are a significant presence in information technology support and modernization for the DoD. We see opportunities for expansion of our sustainment and logistical support activities to enhance the longevity and cost-effectiveness of the systems procured by our customers, and for improving global supply chain management. We also see opportunities to grow our business in providing global services and business process management for DoD needs. Despite the anticipated modest increase in the 2010 defense budget, we believe our revenue growth will exceed expected growth in the DoD budget. We expect strong expansion in our F-35 program as we begin low rate production activities and in sales of information technology solutions. We expect continued growth in our core and adjacent businesses for both domestic and international customers, as we broaden our portfolio and remain committed to excellence in execution. Our revenues have historically not been dependent on supplemental funding requests. Many of our programs require funding over several annual government budget cycles. There is always an inherent risk that these and other DoD programs could become potential targets for future reductions or elimination of funding to pay for other programs, either in the new Administration budget reviews or in the Congressional process of annual appropriations. Non-Department of Defense Business Our experience in the defense arena, together with our core information technology and services expertise, has enabled us to provide products and services to a number of government agencies, including the Departments of Homeland Security, Justice, Commerce, Health and Human Services, State, Transportation and Energy, the U.S. Postal Service, the Social Security Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the National Archives, and the Library of Congress. We have continued to expand our capabilities in critical intelligence, knowledge management and e-Government solutions for our customers, including the Social Security Administration and the EPA, as well for the DoD. We also provide program management, business strategy and consulting, complex systems development and maintenance, complete life-cycle software support, information assurance and enterprise solutions. The expected growth in business process outsourcing has been enabled by rule changes for public/private competitions. In addition, recent trends continue to indicate an increase in demand by federal and civil government agencies for upgrading and investing in new information technology systems and solutions. As a result, we continue to focus our resources in support of infrastructure modernization that allows for interoperability and communication across agencies. 35 Table of Contents Our recent experiences with non-DoD agencies have reinforced our strategy of becoming the world premier global security company. We have seen the global security environment becoming much more complex and dynamic. The very definition of security has continued to change. Over and above traditional military preparedness, we have seen and been a part of further expansion into more effective counter-terrorism and intelligence capabilities, international cooperation activities requiring more interoperable systems, and humanitarian, peace-keeping, and operational stabilization initiatives. Consistent with our DoD business, more affordable logistics and sustainment, a more expansive use of information technology and knowledge-based solutions, and improved levels of network and cybersecurity, all appear to be priorities in our non-DoD business as well. Homeland security, critical infrastructure protection, and improved service levels for civil government agencies also appear to be high customer priorities. The continuing strong emphasis on homeland security may increase demand for our capabilities in areas such as air traffic management, ports, waterways and cargo security, biohazard detection systems for postal equipment, employee identification and credential verification systems, information systems security, and other global security systems solutions. In addition, we may see an increase in demand from the Department of State and the United Nations for mission services, global security and stability operations, and facility services. We have made disciplined acquisitions and investments to reinforce our presence and skills in the information sciences domain. We believe expanded access to continuous high quality situational awareness will remain essential in assuring clarity and reducing uncertainty in today environment. The very need for this increased situational awareness will drive the linkage of increasingly robust communication systems, advanced sensing devices and the computers that control them. This capability will enable the meaningful sharing of information and networks will continue to grow in power and importance to accommodate these new linkages. We also believe the criticality of network security will result in increased demand for cybersecurity, and encryption security solutions. We expect to be well-positioned to meet these growing needs. The prior Administration budget proposal for fiscal year 2009 sought to limit overall growth in the civil agency budgets to one percent per year or less. Similar to spending in the area of defense, civil programs will also have to compete with resource requirements for economic stimulus. Though we expect to see relatively small increases in total non-defense discretionary spending in the near term, we believe our key programs will continue to be supported in the budgets of the various agencies with which we do business. Similar to the risks inherent in our defense business, funding for our civil agency business is contingent on approval in annual appropriations for each of the agencies with which we have business. Major programs may be funded over several annual government budget cycles, with the risk of future reductions or elimination in the new Administration budget review or in the annual Congressional appropriations process. In the civil government business, some risks are unique to particular programs. For example, although indemnification by the U.S. Government to cover potential claims or liabilities resulting from a failure of technologies developed and deployed may be available in some instances for our defense businesses, U.S. Government indemnification may not be available for homeland security purposes. In addition, there are some instances where the U.S. Government could provide indemnification under applicable law, but elects not to do so. While we maintain insurance for some business risks, it is not possible to obtain coverage to protect against all operational risks and liabilities. We generally seek, and in most cases have obtained, limitation of such potential liabilities related to the sale and use of our homeland security products and services through qualification by the Department of Homeland Security under the SAFETY Act provisions of the Homeland Security Act of 2002. SAFETY Act qualification is not available to mitigate potential liability for international applications of our homeland security products and services. Where we are unable to secure indemnification or qualification under the SAFETY Act or choose not to do so, we may nevertheless elect to provide the product or service when we think the related risks are manageable or when emergency conditions relative to national security make qualification impractical. Other Business Considerations We are exposed to risks associated with U.S. Government contracting, including technological uncertainties, dependence on fewer manufacturing suppliers, and obsolescence, as well as Congressional appropriation and allotment of funds each year. Many of our programs involve the development and application of state-of-the-art technologies aimed at achieving challenging goals. As a result, setbacks, delays, cost growth and product failures can occur. In years in which an appropriations bill has not been signed into law before September 30 (the end of the U.S. Government fiscal year), Congress typically passes a continuing resolution that authorizes U.S. Government agencies to continue to operate, generally at the same funding levels from the prior year, but does not authorize new spending initiatives. 36 Table of Contents During periods covered by continuing resolutions (or until the regular appropriation bills are passed), we may experience delays in procurement of products and services due to lack of funding, and those delays may affect our revenue and profit during the period. As a government contractor, we are subject to U.S. Government oversight. The government may ask about and investigate our business practices and audit our compliance with applicable rules and regulations. Depending on the results of those audits and investigations, the government could make claims against us. Under government procurement regulations and practices, an indictment of a government contractor could result in that contractor being fined and suspended from being able to bid on, or be awarded, new government contracts for a period of time. A conviction could result in debarment for a specific period of time. Similar government oversight exists in most other countries where we conduct business. Although we cannot predict the outcome of these types of investigations and inquiries with certainty, based on current facts, we believe the probability is remote that any of the claims, audits or investigations pending against us will have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. We have entered into various joint ventures, teaming and other business arrangements to help support our portfolio of products and services in many of our lines of business, and their activities are closely aligned with our operations. For example, we have a 50% equity interest in United Launch Alliance, LLC (ULA), which provides the production, engineering, test and launch operations associated with U.S. Government launches on Atlas and Delta launch vehicles, and a 50% equity interest in United Space Alliance, LLC (USA), which provides ground processing and other operational services to the Space Shuttle program. In some cases, we form joint ventures with one or more other contractors for the purpose of pursuing a bid for a particular contract and, if successful, the joint venture serves as the prime contractor under that contract. In those instances, the work under contract is performed by subcontractors to the joint venture including, but not limited to, the joint venture investors. We generally limit our exposure under these arrangements to our investment in the venture, which is typically not material, and to the performance of our obligations under the subcontract. In some cases, we guarantee contractual performance by the venture, but are generally cross-indemnified by the other venture participants to the extent of their contractual performance obligations. We remain committed to growth in our sales to international customers. Those customers, similar to our U.S. Government customers, have been affected by the global economic crisis. We expect their decisions regarding defense and security spending will also compete with their own economic stimulus initiatives. We conduct business with foreign governments primarily through Electronic Systems and Aeronautics. Our international sales are composed of foreign military sales through the U.S. Government and direct commercial contracts. With regard to the Aegis Weapon System, our Electronic Systems segment performs activities in the development, production, ship integration and test, and lifetime support for ships of international customers ( e.g. , Japan, Spain, Korea, Norway, and Australia). This segment also was awarded two contracts by the Canadian Government for the upgrade and support of combat systems on Halifax class frigates and Iroquois class destroyers. Electronic Systems produces the PAC-3 missile, an advanced defensive missile designed to intercept incoming airborne threats, for international customers including Japan, Germany, the Netherlands and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). In Aeronautics, the U.S. Government and eight foreign government partners are working together on the design, testing, production and sustainment of the F-35 Lightning II. The F-16 Fighting Falcon has been selected by 25 countries, with 52 follow-on buys from 14 customers. We continue to expand the C-130J Super Hercules air mobility aircraft international footprint with customers in nine countries including recent orders from India and Qatar. In global sustainment, we are leveraging our value as the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) for our major platforms and have set up new production capabilities to provide service life extension, including new wings and support for Norway P-3 fleet and the recent awards from the U.S. and Canadian Governments to upgrade their P-3 aircraft. IS&GS, through its subsidiary Pacific Architects and Engineers (PAE), has increased our presence in certain less developed countries by providing base camp construction, logistics, democratization and management services, among others, generally through our contracts with such customers as the United Nations and the U.S. Department of State. In addition, IS&GS was awarded the contract to provide all data processing for the population census in England, Wales and Northern Ireland for the 2011 Census, including development of the related system. To the extent our contracts and business arrangements with international partners include operations in foreign countries, other risks are introduced into our business, including changing economic conditions, fluctuations in relative currency values, regulation by foreign countries and the potential for unanticipated cost increases resulting from the possible deterioration of political relations. The nature of our international business also makes us subject to the export control 37 Table of Contents regulations of the U. S. Department of State and the Department of Commerce. If these regulations are violated, it could result in monetary penalties and denial of export privileges. We are currently unaware of any violations of export control regulations which are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. Critical Accounting Policies Contract Accounting / Revenue Recognition Approximately 80% of our net sales are derived from long-term contracts for design, development and production activities, which are accounted for under the provisions of American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Statement of Position (SOP) No. 81-1, Accounting for Performance of Construction-Type and Certain Production-Type Contracts . Our remaining net sales are derived from contracts to provide other services that are not associated with design, development or production activities. We account for those contracts in accordance with the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104, Revenue Recognition . We consider the nature of these contracts and the types of products and services provided when we determine the proper accounting method for a particular contract. Accounting for Design, Development and Production Contracts Generally, we record long-term, fixed-price design, development and production contracts on a percentage of completion basis using units-of-delivery as the basis to measure progress toward completing the contract and recognizing sales. For example, we use this method of revenue recognition on our C-130J tactical transport aircraft program and Multiple Launch Rocket System program. For certain other long-term, fixed-price design, development and production contracts that, along with other factors, require us to deliver minimal quantities over a longer period of time or to perform a substantial level of development effort in comparison to the total value of the contract, sales are recorded when we achieve performance milestones or using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress toward completion. Under the cost-to-cost method of accounting, we recognize sales based on the ratio of costs incurred to our estimate of total costs at completion. As examples, we use this methodology for our F-22 Raptor program and the Aegis Weapon System program. In some instances, long-term production programs may require a significant level of development and/or a low rate of initial production units in their early phases, but will ultimately require delivery of increased quantities in later, full rate production stages. In those cases, the revenue recognition methodology may change from the cost-to-cost method to the units-of-delivery method as new contracts for different phases of a program are received after considering, among other factors, program and production stability. As we incur costs under cost-reimbursement-type contracts, we record sales and an estimated profit. Cost-reimbursement-type contracts include time and materials and other level-of-effort-type contracts. Examples of this type of revenue recognition include the F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter development and low-rate initial production contracts, and the THAAD missile defense program. Most of our long-term contracts are denominated in U.S. dollars, including contracts for sales of military products and services to foreign governments conducted through the U.S. Government ( i.e. , foreign military sales). As a general rule, we recognize sales and profits earlier in a production cycle when we use the cost-to-cost and milestone methods of percentage of completion accounting than when we use the units-of-delivery method. In addition, our profits and margins may vary materially depending on the types of long-term contracts undertaken, the costs incurred in their performance, the achievement of other performance objectives, and the stage of performance at which the right to receive fees, particularly under award and incentive fee contracts, is finally determined. Award fees and incentives related to performance on design, development and production contracts, which are generally awarded at the discretion of the customer, as well as penalties related to contract performance, are considered in estimating sales and profit rates. Estimates of award fees are based on actual awards and anticipated performance. Incentive provisions which increase or decrease earnings based solely on a single significant event are generally not recognized until the event occurs. Those incentives and penalties are recorded when there is sufficient information for us to assess anticipated performance. Accounting for design, development and production contracts requires judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract revenues and costs, and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. Due to the scope and nature of the work required to be performed on many of our contracts, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. Contract costs include material, labor and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs. We have to make assumptions regarding labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the 38 Table of Contents work to be performed, the availability of materials, the length of time to complete the contract (to estimate increases in wages and prices for materials), performance by our subcontractors, and the availability and timing of funding from our customer, among other variables. For contract change orders, claims or similar items, we apply judgment in estimating the amounts and assessing the potential for realization. These amounts are only included in contract value when they can be reliably estimated and realization is considered probable. We have accounting policies in place to address these as well as other contractual and business arrangements to properly account for long-term contracts. Products and services provided under long-term design, development and production contracts represent approximately 80% of our net sales for 2008. Therefore, the amounts we record in our financial statements using contract accounting methods and cost accounting standards are material. Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if our underlying circumstances were to change. For example, if underlying assumptions were to change such that our estimated profit rate at completion for all design, development and production contracts was higher or lower by one percentage point, our net earnings would increase or decrease by approximately $225 million. When adjustments in estimated contract revenues or estimated costs at completion are required, any changes from prior estimates are recognized by recording adjustments in the current period for the inception-to-date effect of the changes on current and prior periods. When estimates of total costs to be incurred on a contract exceed total estimates of revenue to be earned, a provision for the entire loss on the contract is recorded in the period the loss is determined. Accounting for Services Contracts Revenue under contracts for services other than those associated with design, development or production activities is generally recognized either as services are performed or when a contractually required event has occurred, depending on the contract. The majority of our services contracts are in our IS&GS segment, including the Automated Flight Service Station contract to provide a network of air traffic facilities and related services, and the U.S Army Corps of Engineers contract to provide information management and technology services. Services contracts primarily include operations and maintenance contracts and outsourcing-type arrangements. Revenue under such contracts is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the period of contract performance, unless evidence suggests that the revenue is earned or the obligations are fulfilled in a different pattern. Costs incurred under these services contracts are expensed as incurred, except that initial set-up costs are capitalized and recognized ratably over the life of the agreement. Earnings related to such services contracts may fluctuate from period to period, particularly in the earlier phases of the contract. Award fees and incentives related to performance on services contracts are recognized when they are fixed and determinable, generally at the date the amount is communicated to us by the customer. Other Contract Accounting Considerations The majority of our sales are driven by pricing based on costs incurred to produce products or perform services under contracts with the U.S. Government. Cost-based pricing is determined under the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR). The FAR provides guidance on the types of costs that are allowable in establishing prices for goods and services under U.S. Government contracts. For example, costs such as those related to charitable contributions, interest expense, and certain advertising and certain public relations activities are unallowable, and therefore not recoverable through sales. In addition, we may enter into agreements with the U.S. Government that address the subjects of allowability and allocability of costs to contracts for specific matters. For example, most of the environmental costs we incur for groundwater treatment and soil remediation related to sites operated in prior years are allocated to our current operations as general and administrative costs under FAR provisions and supporting agreements reached with the U.S. Government. We closely monitor compliance with and the consistent application of our critical accounting policies related to contract accounting. Business segment personnel evaluate our contracts through periodic contract status and performance reviews. Also, regular and recurring evaluations of contract cost, scheduling and technical matters are performed by management personnel independent from the business segment performing work under the contract. Costs incurred and allocated to contracts are reviewed for compliance with U.S. Government regulations by our personnel, and are subject to audit by the Defense Contract Audit Agency. For other information on accounting policies we have in place for recognizing sales and profits, see our discussion under Sales and earnings in Note 1 to the financial statements. Postretirement Benefit Plans Most of our employees are covered by defined benefit pension plans, and we provide certain health care and life insurance benefits to eligible retirees (collectively, postretirement benefit plans see Note 10). Our earnings may be negatively or positively impacted by the amount of expense or income we record for our postretirement benefit plans. This is 39 Table of Contents particularly true with expense or income for defined benefit pension plans and retiree medical and life insurance plans because those calculations are sensitive to changes in several key economic assumptions and workforce demographics. Non-union represented employees hired after January 1, 2006 do not participate in our qualified defined benefit pension plans, but are eligible to participate in our defined contribution plan and our other retirement savings plans. They also have the ability to participate in our retiree medical plans, but we do not subsidize the cost of their participation. We account for our defined benefit pension plans and retiree medical and life insurance plans using Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (FAS) 158, Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106 and 132(R) , FAS 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions , and FAS 106, Employers Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions. FAS 158 requires us to recognize on a plan-by-plan basis the funded status of our postretirement benefit plans as either an asset or liability on our Balance Sheet, with a corresponding adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax, in stockholders equity. The funded status is measured as the difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the benefit obligation of the plan. FAS 87 and FAS 106 require that the amounts we record, including the expense or income for the plans, be computed using actuarial valuations. These valuations include many assumptions, including assumptions we make regarding financial market and other economic conditions. Changes in key economic indicators can result in changes in the assumptions we use. The primary year-end assumptions used to estimate postretirement benefit plan expense or income for the following calendar year are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets for all postretirement benefit plans; the rates of increase in future compensation levels for our defined benefit pension plans; and the health care cost trend rates for our retiree medical plans. The more subjective of these assumptions are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. We use judgment in reassessing these assumptions each year because we have to consider past and current market conditions, and make judgments about future market trends. We also have to consider factors like the timing and amounts of expected contributions to the plans and benefit payments to plan participants. The discount rate we select impacts both the calculation of the benefit obligation at the end of the year as well as the calculation of net postretirement benefit plan cost in the subsequent year. We evaluate several data points in order to arrive at an appropriate discount rate. These items include results from cash flow models, quoted rates from long-term bond indices, and changes in long-term bond rates over the past year. As part of our evaluation, we calculate the approximate average yields on securities that were selected to match our projected postretirement benefit plan cash flows. Our postretirement benefit plan cash flows are input into actuarial models that include data for corporate bonds rated AA or better. The available universe of bonds is adjusted to reflect call provisions, outstanding issue amount, and bonds that are considered outliers ( i.e. bonds with yields too far above or below the mean of the available universe of bonds). As of December 31, 2008, three actuarial models calculated rates of 6.15%, 6.18%, and 6.72% for our qualified defined benefit pension plans. We also evaluated the annualized Merrill Lynch index for long-term AA corporate bonds (15+ years), which was 6.03% at the close of 2008. In general, these data points were 15 to 35 basis points lower than at December 31, 2007. The data we collect provides important inputs into our determination of an appropriate discount rate. After reviewing all of the above data, we determined that the most appropriate discount rate for Lockheed Martin as of December 31, 2008 would be between 6.00% and 6.375%. We selected 6.125% as the discount rate for calculating our benefit obligations at December 31, 2008, compared to 6.375% used at the end of 2007. The impact of the change in the discount rate, together with other factors such as the approximate (28)% actual return on plan assets resulting from downward market conditions in 2008, was a noncash, after-tax reduction to our stockholders equity at December 31, 2008 of approximately $7.25 billion. The negative return on plan assets accounted for over 90% of the decrease in stockholders equity. In addition, the negative return on plan assets in 2008 and the change in the discount rate will increase 2009 pension expense to approximately $1.04 billion, as compared to $462 million in 2008, with approximately 85% of the increase being driven by the negative return on plan assets. The discount rate assumption we select at the end of each year is based on our best estimates and judgment. A reasonably possible change of plus or minus 25 basis points in the 6.125% discount rate assumption at December 31, 2008, with all other assumptions held constant, would decrease or increase the amount of the qualified pension benefit obligation we recorded at the end of 2008 by approximately $900 million, resulting in an after-tax increase or decrease in stockholders equity at the end of the year of approximately $580 million. If the 6.125% discount rate at December 31, 2008 that was used to compute 2009 expense for our qualified defined benefit pension plans had been 25 basis points higher or lower, with all other assumptions held constant, the amount of expense projected for 2009 would be lower or higher by approximately $90 40 Table of Contents million. The results of these scenarios should not be extrapolated to assess other scenarios beyond the 25 basis points, because there is not a direct correlation between a change in the discount rate and the changes in stockholders equity and pension expense. The long-term rate of return assumption represents the expected average rate of earnings on the funds invested, or to be invested, to provide for the benefits included in the plan obligation. This assumption is based on several factors including historical market index returns, the anticipated long-term allocation of plan assets, the historical return data for the trust funds, plan expenses and the potential to outperform market index returns. The actual return in any specific year likely will differ from the assumption, but the average expected return over a long-term future horizon should be approximated by the assumption; therefore, changes in this assumption are less frequent than changes in the discount rate. Any variance in a given year should not, by itself, suggest that the assumption should be changed. Patterns of variances are reviewed over time and then combined with expectations for the future. At December 31, 2008, we concluded that 8.50% was a reasonable estimate for the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption, consistent with the rate used at December 31, 2007. U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS) are a major factor in determining our pension funding requirements and govern the extent to which our pension costs are allocable to and recoverable under contracts with the U.S. Government. Funded amounts are recovered over time through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore are recognized in our net sales. The total funding requirement for our qualified defined benefit pension plans under CAS was $590 million in 2008 which was recorded in our segments results of operations. For 2009, we expect our funding requirements under CAS to decrease slightly. Additional funding requirements computed under the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) rules, as well as discretionary payments, are considered to be prepayments under the CAS rules to the extent the amounts exceed CAS funding requirements. These amounts would be recorded on our Balance Sheet and recovered in future periods. In 2008, 2007 and 2006, we made discretionary prepayments of $109 million, $335 million and $594 million to the Master Retirement Trust (the Master Trust) related to our qualified defined benefit pension plans. Prepayments reduce the amount of future cash funding that will be required under the CAS and IRC rules. The prepayments in prior years were used to fund required contributions in 2008. Based on our known requirements as of December 31, 2008, we would not expect to make any further required cash contributions to the Master Trust related to our qualified defined benefit pension plans in 2009 due to prepayments made in prior years. Due to other events which may occur in 2009, such as pending negotiations for certain collective bargaining agreements, we may decide to make cash contributions in 2009 of as much as $50 million to $100 million based on the outcome of those events. In addition, we may review options for using available cash for further discretionary contributions. The Master Trust primarily supports our qualified defined benefit pension plans. Valuation of the assets in the Master Trust requires judgment relative to the determination of fair value as of December 31. While many of the asset values are based on quoted prices in active markets for identical assets ( e.g. , stock of actively traded public companies), the trustee for the Master Trust uses various pricing sources to determine fair values for other assets where their value may be based on quoted prices for similar instruments or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in inactive markets; or amounts derived from valuation models where all significant inputs are based on active markets that can be observed ( e.g. , fixed income debt securities). For still other investments, values may be amounts derived from valuation models where one or more of the significant inputs into the model cannot be observed and which require the development of relevant assumptions ( e.g. , private equity funds and investments in real estate partnerships). The trustee uses brokers, pricing agents, and other pricing sources to assist in the determination of the value for many of the assets, and works closely with their providers to evaluate the accuracy and timeliness of the pricing data they receive. We review the trustee policies and procedures regarding pricing of investments, their selection of pricing sources, and the statements we receive from them, in our evaluation of the accuracy and reliability of the pricing data included in the statements. Given the current financial environment, we also assess the potential for adjustment to the fair value of certain investments where there is a lag in the availability of data to support the investment value ( e.g ., private equity funds and real estate partnerships). In those cases, we may solicit preliminary valuation updates at year-end from the funds and partnerships. We use that information, and corroborating data from public markets, to determine if any adjustments should be recorded in the fair values. At December 31, 2008, private equity funds and real estate partnerships represented approximately 10% of the total fair value of the Master Trust. In August 2006, the President signed into law legislation related to pension plan funding in response to the public concern over the adequacy of such funding. The law had the effect of accelerating the required amount of annual pension plan contributions under the IRC that most companies are required to pay, beginning in 2008. The legislation provides an exemption for us as well as other large U.S. defense contractors that delays the requirement to accelerate funding. The 41 Table of Contents legislation also requires the CAS Board to modify its pension accounting rules by 2010 to better align the recovery of pension contributions on U.S. Government contracts with the new accelerated funding requirements. The new funding requirements for large U.S. defense contractors will be delayed until the earlier of 2011 or the year in which the changes to the CAS rules are effective. Environmental Matters We are a party to various agreements, proceedings and potential proceedings for environmental cleanup issues, including matters at various sites where we have been designated a potentially responsible party (PRP) by the EPA or by a state agency. We account for environmental remediation liabilities in accordance with SOP 96-1, Environmental Remediation Liabilities . We enter into agreements ( e.g. , administrative orders, consent decrees) which document the extent and timing of our environmental remediation obligation. We are also involved in remediation activities at environmental sites where formal agreements exist, but do not quantify the extent and timing of our obligation. Environmental cleanup activities usually span many years, which makes estimating the costs more judgmental due to, for example, changing remediation technologies. To determine the costs related to cleanup sites, we have to assess the extent of contamination, the appropriate technology to be used to accomplish the remediation, and evolving regulatory environmental standards. We consider these factors in our estimates of the timing and amount of any future costs that may be required for remediation actions, which generally results in the calculation of a range of estimates for a particular environmental site. We record a liability for the amount within the range which we determine to be our best estimate of the cost of remediation or, in cases where no amount within the range is better than another, an amount at the low end of the range. Given the required level of judgment and estimation, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if different assumptions were used or if circumstances were to change ( e.g. , a change in environmental standards or a change in our estimate of the extent of contamination). We perform quarterly reviews of environmental remediation sites and record liabilities and assets in the period it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred and the amounts can be reasonably estimated (see the discussion under Environmental Matters in Notes 1 and 13 to the financial statements). At the end of 2008, the total amount of liabilities recorded on our Balance Sheet for environmental matters was $809 million. We have recorded assets totaling $683 million at December 31, 2008 for the portion of environmental costs that are probable of future recovery in pricing of our products and services to agencies of the U.S. Government. The amount that is expected to be allocated to our commercial businesses or that is determined to be unallowable for pricing under U.S. Government contracts has been expensed through cost of sales. Under agreements reached with the U.S. Government, most of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation are allocated to our operations as general and administrative costs. Under existing government regulations, these and other environmental expenditures relating to our U.S. Government business, after deducting any recoveries received from insurance or other PRPs, are allowable in establishing prices of our products and services. As a result, most of the expenditures we incur are included in our net sales and cost of sales according to U.S. Government agreement or regulation. As disclosed above, we may record changes in the amount of environmental remediation liabilities as a result of our quarterly reviews of the status of our environmental remediation sites, which would result in a change to the corresponding environmental asset and a charge to earnings. For example, if we were to determine that the liabilities should be increased by $100 million, the corresponding assets would be increased by approximately $85 million, with the remainder recorded as a charge to earnings. This allocation is determined annually, based upon our existing and projected business activities with the U.S. Government. We cannot reasonably determine the extent of our financial exposure at all environmental sites with which we are involved. There are a number of former operating facilities which we are monitoring or investigating for potential future remediation. In some cases, although a loss may be probable, it is not possible at this time to reasonably estimate the amount of any obligation for remediation activities because of uncertainties ( e.g. , assessing the extent of the contamination). During any particular quarter, such uncertainties may be resolved to allow us to estimate and recognize the initial liability to remediate a particular former operating site. The amount of the liability could be material. Upon recognition of the liability, a portion will be recognized as an asset with the remainder charged to operations. If we are ultimately found to have liability at those sites where we have been designated a PRP, we expect that the actual costs of remediation will be shared with other liable PRPs. Generally, PRPs that are ultimately determined to be responsible parties are strictly liable for site cleanup and usually agree among themselves to share, on an allocated basis, the costs and expenses for investigation and remediation of hazardous materials. Under existing environmental laws, responsible 42 Table of Contents parties are jointly and severally liable and, therefore, we are potentially liable for the full cost of funding such remediation. In the unlikely event that we were required to fund the entire cost of such remediation, the statutory framework provides that we may pursue rights of contribution from the other PRPs. The amounts we record do not reflect the fact that we may recover some of the environmental costs we have incurred through insurance or from other PRPs, which we are required to pursue by agreement and U.S. Government regulation. Goodwill In accordance with FAS 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets , we review goodwill for impairment on an annual basis and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. Such events or circumstances could include significant changes in the business climate of our industry, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or disposal of a portion of a reporting unit. The assessment is performed at the reporting unit level which we generally define as the business segment level or one level below the business segment. We consider a component of our business to be a reporting unit if it constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available and management regularly reviews the operating results of that component. Our annual testing date is October 1. Performing the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units and the determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. We estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using a discounted cash flow methodology which requires significant judgment. Forecasts of future cash flows are based on our best estimate of future sales and operating costs, based primarily on existing firm orders, expected future orders, contracts with suppliers, labor agreements, general market conditions, and the determination of our weighted average cost of capital. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and/or goodwill impairment for each reporting unit. We evaluate goodwill for impairment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, we measure impairment by comparing the derived fair value of goodwill to its carrying value, and any impairment determined is recorded in the current period. Our goodwill at December 31, 2008 amounted to $9.5 billion. We completed our assessment of goodwill as of October 1, 2008 and determined that no impairment existed at that date. Changes in estimates and assumptions we make in conducting our goodwill assessment could affect the estimated fair value of one or more of our reporting units and could result in a goodwill impairment charge in a future period. However, a 25% decrease in the estimated fair value of any of our reporting units at October 1, 2008 would not have resulted in a goodwill impairment charge. Stock-Based Compensation We account for our stock-based compensation under the provisions of FAS 123(R), Share-Based Payment . We recognize compensation cost related to all share-based payments, including restricted stock units (RSUs) and stock options. Compensation cost for RSUs is based on the market value of our common stock on the date of the award. We estimate the fair value for stock options at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Our stock options do not include market or performance conditions. We generally recognize the compensation cost for RSUs and stock options ratably over a three-year vesting period. The Black-Scholes model requires us to make estimates and assumptions in determining certain inputs to the model, including a volatility factor for our stock, an expected life of the option and a risk-free interest rate. We estimate volatility based on the historical volatility of our daily stock price over the past five years, which is commensurate with the expected life of the options. We base the average expected life on the contractual term of the stock option, historical trends in employee exercise activity and post-vesting employment termination trends. We analyzed the option exercise patterns of our employees and determined there are no significant differences between employee groups. We base the risk-free interest rate on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected life assumed at the date of grant. We also are required to estimate forfeitures at the date of grant which we base on historical experience. If any of our estimates or assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model were to change significantly, stock-based compensation expense could differ materially in the future from the amount recorded in 2008. Compensation cost recognized in 2008, 2007, and 2006 totaled $155 million, $149 million, and $111 million. 43 Table of Contents Results of Operations Since our operating cycle is long-term and involves many types of design, development and production contracts with varying production delivery schedules, the results of operations of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of recorded sales and profits, may not be indicative of future operating results. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context. All per share amounts cited in this discussion are presented on a per diluted share basis. Net Sales (In billions) The following discussion of operating results provides an overview of our operations by focusing on key elements in our Statement of Earnings. The Discussion of Business Segments section which follows describes the contributions of each of our business segments to our consolidated net sales and operating profit for 2008, 2007 and 2006. We follow an integrated approach for managing the performance of our business, and generally focus the discussion of our results of operations around major lines of business versus distinguishing between products and services. Product sales are predominantly generated in the Electronic Systems, Aeronautics and Space Systems segments, while most of our services revenues are generated in our IS&GS segment. For 2008, net sales were $42.7 billion, a 2% increase over 2007. Net sales for 2007 were $41.9 billion, a 6% increase over 2006. Net sales increased during 2008 in the Electronic Systems and IS&GS segments but declined in Aeronautics primarily due to fewer combat aircraft deliveries and at Space Systems due to both government and commercial satellite activities. Net sales increased during 2007 in all segments as compared to 2006. The U.S. Government is our largest customer, accounting for about 84% of our net sales in 2008, 2007, and 2006. Other income (expense), net was $482 million for 2008 compared to $293 million in 2007. This increase was primarily due to higher equity earnings in affiliates, the recognition of the deferred gain from the 2006 sale of our ownership interest in Lockheed Khrunichev Energia International, Inc. (LKEI) and earnings associated with reserves related to various land sales that were no longer required. Other income (expense), net was $293 million for 2007 compared to $336 million in 2006. This decrease primarily was due to gains recognized in 2006 from the sale of shares of Inmarsat and assets of Space Imaging, offset partially by increased equity earnings in affiliates in 2007. State income taxes are included in our operations as general and administrative costs and, under U.S. Government regulations, are allowable in establishing prices for the products and services we sell to the U.S. Government. Therefore, a substantial portion of state income taxes is included in our net sales and cost of sales. As a result, the impact on our operating profit of certain transactions and other matters disclosed in this Form 10-K is disclosed net of state income taxes. Our operating profit for 2008 was $5.1 billion, an increase of 13% compared to 2007. Our operating profit for 2007 was $4.5 billion, an increase of 20% compared to 2006. Except for anticipated reductions at Aeronautics, operating profit increased in all business segments in 2008 as compared to 2007. Operating profit was favorably impacted by lower unallocated Corporate costs and the increase in other income (expense), net as discussed above. In 2007, operating profit increased across all business segments as compared to 2006 and was also favorably impacted by lower unallocated Corporate costs. Unallocated corporate costs in both 2008 and 2007 were favorably impacted by declines in the FAS/CAS pension adjustment, primarily due to the decline in FAS 87 expense. Interest expense for 2008 was $341 million, or $11 million lower than 2007. This decrease mainly was driven by the August 2008 redemption of our $1 billion of floating rate convertible debentures, offset by interest expense on the $500 44 Table of Contents million of new debt issued in the first quarter of 2008. Interest expense for 2007 was $352 million, or $9 million lower than 2006. This decrease was mainly driven by lower interest expense associated with the September 2006 debt exchange. Other non-operating income (expense), net was an expense of $88 million in 2008 compared to income of $193 million in 2007 and income of $183 million in 2006. The decrease in 2008 primarily was due to net unrealized losses on marketable securities held to fund certain non-qualified employee benefit obligations and lower interest income on invested cash balances. The increase in 2007 mainly was due to the $16 million of debt exchange expenses recorded in 2006, as there were no comparable charges in 2007. Our effective income tax rates were 31.6% for 2008, 30.6% for 2007, and 29.6% for 2006. The effective rates for all periods were lower than the statutory rate of 35% due to tax deductions for U.S. manufacturing activities, research and development (R&D) tax credits, and dividends related to our employee stock ownership plan. In addition, the rate for 2007 reflected a reduction in income tax expense of $59 million recorded in the first quarter of 2007 arising from the closure of the IRS examination of the 2003 and 2004 tax years. The rate for 2006 reflected a reduction in income tax expense of $62 million related to a refund claim for additional extraterritorial income (ETI) exclusion benefits in prior years recognized in the third quarter of 2006, and current year ETI tax benefits. The increase in the 2008 effective tax rate when compared to 2007 primarily is due to the $59 million benefit recorded in the first quarter of 2007. The increase in the 2007 effective tax rate when compared to 2006 primarily is the result of the elimination of the extraterritorial tax benefits in 2007, partially offset by additional tax benefits in 2007 resulting from a statutory increase in U.S. manufacturing benefits, new legislation that provided enhanced R&D tax credits and the favorable closure of an IRS audit. The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 signed by the President on October 3, 2008 retroactively extends the R&D tax credit for two years, from January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2009, and increases the alternative simplified R&D credit rate from 12% to 14% for calendar year 2009. As a result, we recognized a tax benefit, which reduced our income tax expense in the fourth quarter of 2008 by $36 million. Net earnings increased as compared to the prior year for the sixth consecutive year. We reported net earnings of $3.2 billion ($7.86 per share) in 2008, $3.0 billion ($7.10 per share) in 2007, and $2.5 billion ($5.80 per share) in 2006. Both net earnings and earnings per share were affected by the factors discussed above. In addition, earnings per share has benefitted from the significant number of shares repurchased under our share repurchase program. The effect of those repurchases has been partially offset by common stock issued under our stock-based compensation and defined contribution plans. Discussion of Business Segments We operate in four principal business segments: Electronic Systems, IS&GS, Aeronautics and Space Systems. We organize our business segments based on the nature of the products and services offered. Our Electronic Systems business segment manages complex programs and designs, develops, and integrates hardware and software solutions to ensure the mission readiness of armed forces and government agencies worldwide. With such a broad portfolio of products and services, many of its activities involve a combination of both development and production contracts with varying delivery schedules. This business segment has continued to expand its core competencies as a leading systems integrator both domestically and internationally. Some of its more significant programs, including the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system, the VH-71 Presidential Helicopter, the Aegis Weapon System and the Arrowhead fire control system for the Apache helicopter, demonstrate the diverse products and services Electronic Systems provides. Our IS&GS business segment combines a full range of information competencies with a global delivery capability. The segment provides full life-cycle support and expertise in the areas of software and systems engineering, including space, air, and ground systems. It provides logistics, mission operations support, peacekeeping, and nation-building services for a wide variety of U.S. defense and civil government agencies. IS&GS key programs and activities include the Transformational Communications MILSATCOM Mission Operations Segment (TMOS) program, the FAA En Route Automation Modernization (ERAM) program, the Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) program, the 2010 Decennial Response Integration System (DRIS) program, and a number of task order vehicles (indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) contracts) in our Information Technology line of business. We expect continued strong growth in providing information technology solutions to government agencies. Aeronautics is engaged in the research, design, development, manufacture, integration, sustainment, support and upgrade of advanced military aircraft, including combat and air mobility aircraft, unmanned air vehicles, and related 45 Table of Contents technologies. Key Combat Aircraft programs include the F-35 Lightning II, F-22 Raptor, and F-16 Fighting Falcon fighter aircraft. The F-35 has completed the seventh year of development and has entered low rate initial production. Aeronautics has been producing F-22s since 1997, and delivered 23 to the U.S. Air Force in 2008, bringing the total deliveries to 133 through 2008. A total of 28 F-16s were delivered in 2008 worldwide, bringing the total deliveries to 4,417 through 2008. Key Air Mobility programs include the C-130J Super Hercules and the C-5 Super Galaxy. We delivered 12 C-130Js in 2008. A total of 257 C-130Js have been ordered with 171 delivered through 2008. In addition to aircraft production, Aeronautics provides logistics support, sustainment, and upgrade modification services for its aircraft. Sales at Aeronautics are expected to grow in 2009 primarily due to the projected increase in F-35 production activities and C-130J deliveries. Our Space Systems business segment is engaged in the design, research and development, engineering, and production of satellites, strategic and defensive missile systems, and space transportation systems. Through ownership interests in two joint ventures, USA and ULA, the segment also includes Space Shuttle processing activities and expendable launch services for the U.S. Government. Government satellite programs include the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) system, the Mobile User Objective System (MUOS), the Global Positioning System (GPS) and the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS). Strategic and missile defense programs include the targets and countermeasures program and the fleet ballistic missile program. Space transportation includes the NASA Orion program. In the following table of financial data, total operating profit of the business segments is reconciled to the corresponding consolidated amount. Because the activities of the investees in which certain business segments hold equity interests are closely aligned with the operations of those segments, the equity earnings (losses) from those investees are included in the operating profit of the respective segments. The reconciling item Unallocated Corporate income (expense), net includes the FAS/CAS pension adjustment (see the discussion in Discussion of Business Segments under Unallocated Corporate Income (Expense), Net ), costs for stock-based compensation programs, the effects of items not considered part of management evaluation of segment operating performance, and Corporate costs not allocated to the operating segments, as well as other miscellaneous Corporate activities. This table shows net sales and operating profit of the business segments and reconciles to the consolidated total. (In millions) 2008 2007 2006 Net Sales Electronic Systems $ 11,620 $ 11,143 $ 10,519 Information Systems & Global Services 11,611 10,213 8,990 Aeronautics 11,473 12,303 12,188 Space Systems 8,027 8,203 7,923 Total $ 42,731 $ 41,862 $ 39,620 Operating Profit Electronic Systems $ 1,508 $ 1,410 $ 1,264 Information Systems & Global Services 1,076 949 804 Aeronautics 1,433 1,476 1,221 Space Systems 953 856 742 Total business segments 4,970 4,691 4,031 Unallocated Corporate income (expense), net 161 (164 ) (261 ) Total $ 5,131 $ 4,527 $ 3,770 The following segment discussions also include information relating to negotiated backlog for each segment. Total negotiated backlog was approximately $80.9 billion, $76.7 billion, and $75.9 billion at December 31, 2008, 2007, and 2006. These amounts included both funded backlog (unfilled firm orders for which funding has been both authorized and appropriated by the customer Congress in the case of U.S. Government agencies) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding has not yet been appropriated). Negotiated backlog does not include unexercised options or task orders to be issued under indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) contracts. Funded backlog was approximately $51.1 billion at December 31, 2008. The Aeronautics segment generally includes fewer programs that have much larger sales and operating results than programs included in the other segments. Due to the large number of comparatively smaller programs in the remaining segments, the discussion of the results of operations of those business segments generally focuses on lines of business within the segment rather than on specific programs. The following tables of financial information and related discussion of the results of operations of our business segments are consistent with the presentation of segment information in Note 4 to the 46 Table of Contents financial statements. We have a number of programs that are classified by the U.S. Government and cannot be specifically described. The operating results of these classified programs are included in our consolidated and business segment results, and are subjected to the same oversight and internal controls as our other programs. In our discussion of comparative results, changes in net sales and operating profit are generally expressed in terms of volume and/or performance. Volume refers to increases (or decreases) in sales resulting from varying production activity levels, deliveries or services levels on individual contracts. Volume changes typically include a corresponding change in operating profit based on the estimated profit rate at completion for a particular contract for design, development and production activities. Performance generally refers to changes in contract profit booking rates. These changes on our contracts for products usually relate to profit recognition associated with revisions to total estimated costs at completion of the contracts that reflect improved (or deteriorated) operating or award fee performance on a particular contract. Changes in contract profit booking rates on contracts for products are recognized by recording adjustments in the current period for the inception-to-date effect of the changes on current and prior periods. Recognition of the inception-to-date adjustment in the current or prior periods may affect the comparison of segment operating results. Segment Operating Profit (In millions) Electronic Systems Electronic Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2008 2007 2006 Net sales $ 11,620 $ 11,143 $ 10,519 Operating profit 1,508 1,410 1,264 Backlog at year-end 22,500 21,200 19,700 Net sales for Electronic Systems increased by 4% in 2008 compared to 2007. Sales increases in Missiles & Fire Control (M&FC) and Maritime Systems & Sensors (MS2) more than offset a decline in Platform, Training & Energy (PT&E). M&FC sales increased $327 million mainly due to higher volume on fire control and tactical missile programs. MS2 sales grew $201 million primarily due to higher volume on surface systems, undersea systems and radar systems activities. The $51 million decline in PT&E mainly was due to lower volume on platform integration activities. Net sales for Electronic Systems increased by 6% in 2007 compared to 2006. Sales increased in M&FC, MS2, and PT&E. M&FC sales increased $258 million mainly due to higher volume in fire control systems and air defense programs, which more than offset declines in tactical missile programs. MS2 sales grew $254 million due to volume increases in undersea and radar systems activities that were offset partially by decreases in surface systems activities. PT&E sales increased $113 million, primarily due to higher volume in platform integration activities, which more than offset declines in distribution technology activities. Operating profit for the segment increased by 7% in 2008 compared to 2007. In 2008, operating profit increases at M&FC and MS2 more than offset a decrease at PT&E. Operating profit increased $82 million at M&FC mainly due to improved performance on air defense programs and higher volume on tactical missile and fire control programs. There was a $80 million increase at MS2, which mainly was attributable to higher volume and improved performance on surface systems, undersea systems, and radar systems programs. PT&E operating profit declined $61 million primarily due to performance on platform integration activities. 47 Table of Contents Operating profit for the segment increased by 12% in 2007 compared to 2006, representing an increase in all three lines of business during the year. Operating profit increased $70 million at PT&E primarily due to higher volume and improved performance on platform integration activities. MS2 operating profit increased $32 million due to higher volume on undersea and tactical systems activities that more than offset lower volume on surface systems activities. At M&FC, operating profit increased $32 million due to higher volume in fire control systems and improved performance in tactical missile programs, which partially were offset by performance on certain international air defense programs in 2006. The increase in backlog during 2008 over 2007 resulted primarily from increased orders for platform integration programs at PT&E and for certain tactical missile programs and fire control systems at M&FC. The increase in backlog during 2007 over 2006 resulted primarily from increased orders for certain tactical missile programs and fire control systems at M&FC and platform integration programs at PT&E. Information Systems & Global Services Information Systems & Global Services operating results included the following: (In millions) 2008 2007 2006 Net sales $ 11,611 $ 10,213 $ 8,990 Operating profit 1,076 949 804 Backlog at year-end 13,300 11,800 10,500 Net sales for IS&GS increased by 14% in 2008 compared to 2007. Sales increased in all three lines of business during the year. Global Services sales increased $568 million principally due to Pacific Architects and Engineers (PAE) programs, mission services and other international activities. Mission Solutions sales increased by $444 million primarily due to mission and combat support solutions activities, as well as by transportation and security solutions. There was a $386 million increase in Information Systems, which mainly was due to higher volume on enterprise solutions and services activities. Net sales for IS&GS increased by 14% in 2007 compared to 2006. During the year, sales increased in Global Services, Information Systems, and Mission Solutions. Global Services sales increased $609 million due to higher volume and growth in mission services activities including the impact of the acquisition of PAE in September 2006. Information Systems sales increased $401 million due to growth in information technology and the acquisition of Management Systems Designers, Inc. (MSD) in February 2007. Higher volume in mission and combat support activities accounted for the majority of the $216 million sales increase at Mission Solutions. Operating profit for the segment increased by 13% in 2008 compared to 2007. Operating profit increased in all three lines of business during the year. Mission Solutions operating profit increased by $46 million due to higher volume and improved performance on transportation and security solutions programs, as well as mission and combat support solutions activities. Global Services operating profit increased $42 million primarily due to volume and improved performance on mission services programs and other international activities. In Information Systems, operating profit increased by $24 million due to higher volume on information technology programs and a benefit from a contract restructuring during the first quarter of 2008, which more than offset declines in mission services activities. Operating profit for the segment increased by 18% in 2007 compared to 2006. During the year, operating profit increased in all three lines of business. Mission Solutions operating profit increased $90 million due to higher volume in mission and combat support solutions and aviation solutions activities. Global Services operating profit growth of $35 million was primarily attributable to the acquisition of PAE. Information Systems increased $34 million primarily due to improved performance of information technology activities and the acquisition of MSD. The increase in backlog during 2008 over 2007 was due to increased orders in Mission Solutions activities and Global Services programs. The increase in backlog during 2007 over 2006 was due to increased orders in Mission Support activities and Information Systems programs. Aeronautics Aeronautics operating results included the following: (In millions) 2008 2007 2006 Net sales $ 11,473 $ 12,303 $ 12,188 Operating profit 1,433 1,476 1,221 Backlog at year-end 27,200 26,300 26,900 48 Table of Contents Net sales for Aeronautics decreased by 7% in 2008 compared to 2007. The decline in net sales was due to decreases in Combat Aircraft and Air Mobility, which more than offset increases in Other Aeronautics Programs. Combat Aircraft sales declined $947 million due to lower volume on F-16, F-22 and F-35 programs. The $74 million decrease in Air Mobility primarily was due to lower volume on other air mobility programs. There were 12 C-130J deliveries in both 2008 and 2007. The $191 million increase in Other Aeronautics Programs mainly was due to higher volume in sustainment services activities. Net sales for Aeronautics increased by 1% in 2007 compared to 2006. The increase in net sales was due to growth in Other Aeronautics Programs and Combat Aircraft, which were offset partially by declines in Air Mobility. Other Aeronautics Programs increased $106 million primarily due to higher volume in sustainment services activities. Combat Aircraft sales increased $43 million mainly due to volume increases on the F-22 program that more than offset declines on F-16 programs. These increases were offset partially by a $34 million decline in Air Mobility sales due to lower volume on C-130 programs. Operating profit for the segment decreased 3% in 2008 compared to 2007. Operating profit declines in Combat Aircraft partially were offset by increases in Other Aeronautics Programs and Air Mobility. In Combat Aircraft, operating profit declined $86 million mainly due to lower volume on F-16 programs and lower volume and the decline in 2008 of the amount of favorable inception-to-date performance adjustments on the F-22 program. There was a $34 million increase in Other Aeronautics Programs, which mainly was due to higher volume in sustainment services activities that partially was offset by a decrease in operating profit due to performance on a P-3 modification contract. In Air Mobility, operating profit increased $13 million mainly due to higher volume and improved performance on C-130 support activities, which more than offset a decline on C-5 programs. Operating profit for the segment increased 21% in 2007 compared to 2006. Operating profit increases in Combat Aircraft more than offset decreases in Other Aeronautics Programs and Air Mobility. Combat Aircraft operating profit increased $326 million mainly due to improved performance on F-22 and F-16 programs. Air Mobility and Other Aeronautics Programs declined $77 million due to lower operating profit in support and sustainment activities. Backlog increased in 2008 as compared to 2007 primarily due to increased orders on the C-130J and F-35 programs, which were partially offset by declines resulting from sales volume on the F-22 program. Backlog decreased in 2007 as compared to 2006 primarily as a result of sales volume on the F-35 program. This decrease was offset partially by increased orders on the F-22 and C-130J programs. Space Systems Space Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2008 2007 2006 Net sales $ 8,027 $ 8,203 $ 7,923 Operating profit 953 856 742 Backlog at year-end 17,900 17,400 18,800 Net sales for Space Systems decreased 2% in 2008 compared to 2007. Sales declines in Satellites partially were offset by growth in Space Transportation. In Satellites, sales declined $579 million due to lower volume in both commercial and government satellite activities. There were two commercial satellite deliveries during 2008, compared to four in 2007. Space Transportation sales increased $427 million primarily due to higher volume on the Orion program. Net sales for Space Systems increased 4% in 2007 compared to 2006. During the year, sales increases at Satellites and Strategic & Defensive Missile Systems (S&DMS) more than offset declines at Space Transportation. In Satellites, an increase of $354 million was mainly driven by higher volume in government satellite activities, while commercial satellites sales remained relatively flat. There were four commercial satellite deliveries during 2007 and five in 2006. Higher volume in strategic missile programs accounted for the majority of a $225 million increase in sales at S&DMS. Space Transportation sales declined $290 million. This decline was expected given the divestiture of the International Launch Services business and the formation of ULA in the fourth quarter of 2006. The Corporation no longer records sales on Atlas launch vehicles and related support to the U.S. Government, as ULA is accounted for under the equity method of accounting. This sales decline was offset partially by higher volume on the Orion program. 49 Table of Contents Operating profit increased by 11% in 2008 compared to 2007. The increase in operating profit was due to Space Transportation, which partially was offset by a decline in Satellites. In Space Transportation, the $135 million increase mainly was attributable to higher equity earnings on the ULA joint venture, volume on the Orion program, and the results from successful negotiations of a terminated commercial launch service contract in the first quarter of 2008. The improvement in ULA earnings also reflects the absence in 2008 of a charge recognized in the third quarter of 2007 for asset impairment on the Delta II medium lift launch vehicles. In Satellites, operating profit declined by $42 million during the year due to lower volume and performance on certain government satellite programs. Operating profit for the segment increased 15% in 2007 compared to 2006. During the year, operating profit growth in Satellites and S&DMS more than offset declines at Space Transportation. Satellites operating profit increased $90 million due to improved performance in commercial and government satellite activities. Increased operating profit of $33 million at S&DMS was due to higher volume and improved performance on strategic missile programs. In Space Transportation, the decline of $18 million in 2007 operating profit from 2006 was mainly due to a charge recognized by ULA in the third quarter of 2007 for an asset impairment on Delta II medium lift launch vehicles. The decline also reflects benefits recognized in 2006 from risk reduction activities, including the definitization of the ELC contract, and other performance improvements on the Atlas program, with no similar items recognized in the comparable period in 2007. The increase in backlog during 2008 as compared to 2007 was primarily due to increased orders on government satellite programs and on the Orion program. The decrease in backlog during 2007 as compared to 2006 was mainly due to sales volume related to government and commercial satellite programs, which more than offset increased orders on strategic missile programs. Unallocated Corporate Income (Expense), Net The following table shows the components of unallocated Corporate income (expense), net. (In millions) 2008 2007 2006 FAS/CAS pension adjustment $ 128 $ (58 ) $ (275 ) Items not considered in segment operating performance 193 71 230 Stock compensation expense (155 ) (149 ) (111 ) Other, net (5 ) (28 ) (105 ) $ 161 $ (164 ) $ (261 ) The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension expense calculated in accordance with FAS 87 and pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS. Because the CAS expense is recovered through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore recognized in a particular segment net sales and cost of sales, the results of operations of our segments only include pension expense as determined and funded in accordance with CAS rules. Accordingly, the FAS/CAS adjustment is not included in segment operating results and therefore is included in the reconciliation of total segment operating profit to consolidated operating profit under GAAP. The following table shows the CAS funding that is included as expense in the segments operating results, the related FAS expense, and the resulting FAS/CAS pension adjustment: (In millions) 2008 2007 2006 FAS 87 expense $ (462 ) $ (687 ) $ (938 ) Less: CAS expense and funding (590 ) (629 ) (663 ) FAS/CAS pension adjustment income (expense) $ 128 $ (58 ) $ (275 ) The FAS 87 expense decreased in 2008 compared to 2007, and in 2007 compared to 2006. The decrease in both periods was due to an increase in the discount rate and other factors such as the effects of the actual return on plan assets at the respective plan measurement dates through December 31, 2007 (see the related discussion in Critical Accounting Policies under the caption Postretirement Benefit Plans ). Certain items are excluded from segment results as part of senior management evaluation of segment operating performance consistent with the management approach permitted by FAS 131, Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information . For example, gains and losses related to the disposition of businesses or investments managed by Corporate, as well as certain other Corporate activities, are not considered by management in evaluating the operating 50 Table of Contents performance of business segments. Therefore, for purposes of segment reporting, the following items were included in unallocated Corporate income (expense), net for 2008, 2007 and 2006: (In millions, except per share data) Operating Profit Net Earnings Earnings Per Share Year ended December 31, 2008 Recognition of deferred gain on LKEI and ILS $ 108 $ 70 $ 0.17 Elimination of reserves associated with various land sales 85 56 0.14 $ 193 $ 126 $ 0.31 Year ended December 31, 2007 Gain on sale of interest in Comsat International $ 25 $ 16 $ 0.04 Gain on sale of land in California 25 16 0.04 Earnings from reversal of legal reserves due to settlement 21 14 0.03 $ 71 $ 46 $ 0.11 Year ended December 31, 2006 Gain on sale of interest in Inmarsat $ 127 $ 83 $ 0.19 Gains on sale of land 51 33 0.08 Earnings from expiration of AES transaction indemnification 29 19 0.04 Gain on sale of Space Imaging assets 23 15 0.03 $ 230 $ 150 $ 0.34 The change in the Other, net component of unallocated Corporate income (expense), net, between the periods primarily was due to lower expense associated with a number of Corporate activities. Liquidity and Cash Flows Current economic and market conditions have placed material constraints on the ability of many companies to access capital in the debt and equity markets. Over the past few years, we have generated strong cash flows, and generally have funded our operations, debt service and repayments, capital expenditures, share repurchases, dividends, acquisitions, retirement plan funding, and discretionary funding needs from our cash from operations. We have accessed the capital markets on limited occasions, as needed including the issuance of $500 million of debt securities in 2008. We also access the credit markets, as needed, to obtain letters of credit to support customer advance payments and for other trade finance purposes ( e.g. , guaranteeing our performance on particular contracts). At this time, our access to liquidity and capital resources generally has not been materially affected by the current credit environment. Our cash from operations continues to be sufficient to support our operations and anticipated capital expenditure needs. If market conditions continue to deteriorate, the cost or availability of future borrowings, if any, in the debt markets, the fees we pay under our credit facilities, or the cost or availability of providing letters of credit or other trade instruments to support our operating activities may be materially and adversely affected. We have financing resources available (see discussion under Capital Structure and Resources) to fund potential cash outflows that are less predictable or more discretionary. Although credit from financial institutions is constrained, there are attractive interest rates available for credit worthy corporate issuers via the public debt markets. We believe that we have access to the credit markets, if needed for liquidity or general corporate purposes. We have encountered some instances in which financial institutions participating in our standby credit facilities have less credit capacity or are seeking to reduce their credit exposures generally. This may result in the need to identify additional financial institutions to participate in existing credit facilities. In addition, it may be more difficult to structure financing for future long-term project finance and joint venture activities, especially in international markets. Current market conditions raise increased concerns about counterparty risk. We are exposed to counterparty credit risk, as we engage in derivative transactions with financial institutions to hedge foreign currency exposures. In terms of supply chain management, our suppliers and subcontractors also may find it more difficult to access credit to support their operations. To date, we have not been materially adversely affected by counterparty credit defaults or subcontractor and supplier credit support difficulties. 51 Table of Contents In 2008, we repaid $1.1 billion in long-term debt, including the redemption of $1 billion in principal amount of our convertible debentures. Over the past decade, we have reduced our long-term debt by over $7.9 billion, from $11.5 billion at year end 1999 to $3.6 billion at year end 2008. Our currently scheduled debt maturities through 2012 total a relatively modest $245 million. Cash received from customers, either from the payment of invoices for work performed or for advances in excess of costs incurred, is our primary source of cash. We generally do not begin work on contracts until funding is appropriated by the customer. Billing timetables and payment terms on our contracts vary based on a number of factors, including the contract type. For example, contracts may be cost reimbursable, time and materials, or fixed price. We generally bill and collect cash more frequently under cost reimbursable and time and materials contracts, which together represent approximately 65% of the revenues we recorded in 2008, as we are authorized to bill as the costs are incurred or work is performed. In contrast to cost reimbursable contracts, for fixed price contracts, we generally do not bill until milestones, including deliveries, are achieved. A number of our contracts may provide for performance-based payments which allow us to bill and collect cash prior to completing the work. Fixed price contracts represented approximately 35% of the revenues we recorded in 2008. The majority of our capital expenditures for 2008 and those planned for 2009 can be divided into the categories of facilities infrastructure, equipment, and information technology (IT). Expenditures for facilities infrastructure and equipment are generally incurred to support new and existing programs across all of our business segments. For example, we have projects underway in our Aeronautics business segment for facilities and equipment to support low rate production of the F-35 combat aircraft. In addition, we have several projects underway to modernize certain of our Space Systems facilities that are as much as 50 years old. We also incur capital expenditures for IT to support programs and general enterprise IT infrastructure. We have a balanced cash deployment and disciplined growth strategy to enhance shareholder value and position ourselves to take advantage of new business opportunities when they arise. Consistent with that strategy, we have invested in our business ( e.g. , capital expenditures, independent research and development), made selective acquisitions of businesses, repurchased shares, increased our dividends, and opportunistically reduced and refinanced our debt. The following provides an overview of our execution of this strategy. Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities (In millions) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $183 million to $4.4 billion in 2008 as compared to 2007. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in net earnings of $184 million, lower postretirement benefit plan contributions of $429 million, and a $100 million dividend received from ULA. This increase was offset partially by a $291 million decrease in cash provided by working capital and higher net tax payments of $103 million compared to 2007. The decline in operating working capital was primarily due to an increase in inventories on Combat Aircraft programs at Aeronautics and a decrease in customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred on various programs in the Missiles & Fire Control line of business at Electronic Systems. Operating working capital accounts consist of receivables, inventories, accounts payable, and customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $458 million to $4.2 billion in 2007 as compared to 2006. In 2007, the increase was primarily attributable to an increase in net earnings of $504 million and lower postretirement benefit plan contributions of $399 million as compared to 2006. This increase was offset partially by a $309 million decrease in cash provided by operating working capital and higher net tax payments of $272 million compared to 2006. The decline in 52 Table of Contents operating working capital was primarily due to an increase in receivables on various programs in the Maritime Systems & Sensors line of business at Electronic Systems. Investing Activities Capital expenditures Capital expenditures for property, plant and equipment amounted to $926 million in 2008, $940 million in 2007, and $893 million in 2006. We expect our capital expenditures over the next three years to exceed 2008 expenditures consistent with the expected growth in our business and to support specific program requirements. Acquisitions, divestitures and other activities We have a process to selectively identify businesses for acquisition that meet our strategic, operational and financial targets, help build a balanced portfolio and provide disciplined growth. As disclosed under the caption Acquisition and Divestiture Activities, we paid $233 million in 2008 for acquisition activities, including the acquisitions of businesses and investments in affiliates, compared with $337 million in 2007 and $1,122 million in 2006. In 2007, we received proceeds of $26 million from the sale of our remaining interest in Comsat International. During 2006, we received proceeds of $132 million from the sale of our remaining shares in Inmarsat, $24 million from the sale of assets of Space Imaging, LLC, and $24 million from the sale of Lockheed Martin Intersputnik. Financing Activities Share issuances, repurchases and dividends Cash received from the issuance of our common stock in connection with stock option exercises during the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007, and 2006 totaled $250 million, $350 million, and $627 million. Those activities resulted in the issuance of 4.7 million shares, 7.1 million shares, and 13.6 million shares during the respective periods. During 2008, 2007 and 2006, we used cash of $2,931 million, $2,127 million, and $2,115 million for common share repurchase activity (see Note 11). Our share repurchase program authorizes the repurchase of up to 158 million shares of our common stock from time-to-time at management discretion, including 30 million of additional shares our Board authorized for repurchase in 2008. As of December 31, 2008, we had repurchased a total of 124.3 million shares under the program, and there remained approximately 33.7 million shares that may be repurchased in the future. The payment of dividends on our common shares is one of the key components of our balanced cash deployment strategy. Shareholders were paid cash dividends of $737 million in 2008, $615 million in 2007, and $538 million in 2006. We have increased our quarterly dividend rate in each of the last three years. We declared quarterly dividends: in 2008 of $0.42 per share during each of the first three quarters and $0.57 per share for the last quarter; in 2007 of $0.35 per share during each of the first three quarters and $0.42 per share for the last quarter; and in 2006 of $0.30 per share during each of the first three quarters and $0.35 per share for the last quarter. Issuance and repayment of long-term debt In 2008 we issued $500 million of long-term notes due in 2013. The notes have a fixed coupon interest rate of 4.12%. Cash provided from operations has been our principal source of funds to reduce our long-term debt. In 2008, we paid a total of $1.0 billion representing the principal amount of our floating rate convertible debentures that were delivered for conversion or otherwise redeemed, and issued 5.0 million shares of our common stock to satisfy conversion obligations of $571 million in excess of the principal amount (see Note 9). We also paid another $103 million during 2008 related to other repayments of long-term debt based on scheduled maturities, compared to $32 million in debt repayments in 2007. During 2006, we paid $353 million to complete an exchange of debt and $210 million related to scheduled debt repayments. Capital Structure and Resources At December 31, 2008, we held cash and cash equivalents of approximately $2.2 billion and short-term investments of $61 million. Our long-term debt, net of unamortized discounts, amounted to $3.6 billion. As of the end of 2008, our long-term debt bears interest at fixed rates and mainly is in the form of publicly-issued notes and debentures. In 2008, we issued $500 million of 4.12% notes due in 2013. In August 2008, all of our $1.0 billion of floating rate convertible debentures were delivered for conversion or otherwise redeemed consistent with our announcement of their planned redemption, and we issued 5.0 million shares of our common stock to satisfy conversion obligations of $571 million in excess of the principal amount (see Note 9). In August 2006, we issued $1.1 billion of 6.15% notes due 2036 (the Notes). The Notes were issued in exchange for certain other of our then outstanding debt securities, and cash consideration of $343 million. The cash consideration of $343 million is included in the Statement of Cash Flows in financing activities, and the Notes are included on our Balance Sheet 53 Table of Contents net of the unamortized discount under the caption Long-term Debt, Net. The expenses associated with the exchange, net of state income tax benefits, totaled $16 million and were recorded in other non-operating income (expense), net. They reduced net earnings in 2006 by $11 million ($0.03 per share). Our stockholders equity amounted to $2.9 billion at December 31, 2008, a decrease of $6.9 billion from December 31, 2007. The decrease primarily was due to the annual remeasurement of the funded status of our postretirement benefit plans at December 31 under FAS 158 (see Note 10), which increased the accumulated other comprehensive loss by $7.25 billion, the repurchase of 29 million common shares for $2.9 billion, and payment of $737 million of dividends during the year. These decreases partially were offset by net earnings of $3.2 billion and employee stock activity of $746 million. As we repurchase our common shares, we reduce common stock for the $1 of par value of the shares repurchased, with the remainder of the purchase price over par value recorded as a reduction of additional paid-in capital. Due to the volume of repurchases made under our share repurchase program, additional paid-in capital was reduced to zero, with the remainder of the excess of purchase price over par value of $2.1 billion recorded as a reduction of retained earnings. Through our debt repayment activities, our long-term debt balance has declined $2.4 billion over the last five years from $6.2 billion at December 31, 2003. Our debt-to-total capital ratio was 57% at December 31, 2008, up from 31% at December 31, 2007. The increase from 2007 to 2008 primarily was attributable to the decrease in stockholders equity associated with postretirement benefit plans discussed above. Debt-to-Total Capital Ratio Return on invested capital (ROIC) improved by 30 basis points during 2008 to 21.7%. We define ROIC as net earnings plus after-tax interest expense divided by average invested capital (stockholders equity plus debt), after adjusting stockholders equity by adding back amounts related to postretirement benefit plans. We believe that reporting ROIC provides investors with greater visibility into how effectively we use the capital invested in our operations. We use ROIC as one of the inputs in our evaluation of multi-year investment decisions and as a long-term performance measure. We also use ROIC as a factor in evaluating management performance under certain of our incentive compensation plans. ROIC is not a measure of financial performance under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, and may not be defined and calculated by other companies in the same manner. ROIC should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net earnings as an indicator of performance. See Consolidated Financial Data Five Year Summary on page 31 of this Form 10-K for additional information concerning how we calculate ROIC. Return on Invested Capital Ratio 54 Table of Contents At December 31, 2008, we had in place a $1.5 billion revolving credit facility with a group of banks which expires in June 2012. There were no borrowings outstanding under the facility at December 31, 2008. Borrowings under the credit facility would be unsecured and bear interest at rates based, at our option, on the Eurodollar rate or a bank defined Base Rate. Each bank obligation to make loans under the credit facility is subject to, among other things, our compliance with various representations, warranties and covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets, and a covenant not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio. The leverage ratio covenant excludes the adjustments recognized in stockholders equity related to our postretirement benefit plans. We have agreements in place with banking institutions to provide for the issuance of commercial paper. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding at December 31, 2008. If we were to issue commercial paper, the borrowings would be supported by the $1.5 billion credit facility. We have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission to provide for the issuance of an indeterminate amount of debt securities. If we were to issue debt under this shelf registration, we would expect to use the net proceeds for general corporate purposes. These purposes may include repayment of debt, working capital needs, capital expenditures, acquisitions and any other general corporate purpose. We actively seek to finance our business in a manner that preserves financial flexibility while minimizing borrowing costs to the extent practicable. We review changes in financial, market and economic conditions to manage the types, amounts and maturities of our indebtedness. We may at times refinance existing indebtedness, vary our mix of variable-rate and fixed-rate debt, or seek alternative financing sources for our cash and operational needs. Contractual Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements At December 31, 2008, we had contractual commitments to repay debt, make payments under operating leases, settle obligations related to agreements to purchase goods and services, and settle tax and other liabilities. Capital lease obligations were negligible. Payments due under these obligations and commitments are as follows: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term debt (a) $ 4,145 $ 242 $ 2 $ 652 $ 3,249 Interest payments 4,729 286 533 516 3,394 Other liabilities 2,039 234 649 213 943 Operating lease obligations 1,096 262 407 262 165 Purchase obligations: Operating activities 21,424 12,843 7,321 1,181 79 Capital expenditures 239 206 33 Total contractual cash obligations $ 33,672 $ 14,073 $ 8,945 $ 2,824 $ 7,830 (a) The total amount of long-term debt excludes the unamortized discount of $340 million (see Note 9). Generally, our long-term debt obligations are subject to, along with other things, compliance with certain covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets. Interest payments include interest related to the outstanding debt through maturity. Amounts related to other liabilities represent the contractual obligations for certain long-term liabilities recorded as of December 31, 2008. Such amounts mainly include expected payments under deferred compensation plans, non-qualified pension plans, environmental liabilities and business acquisition agreements. Obligations related to environmental liabilities represent our estimate of obligations for sites at which we are performing remediation activities, excluding amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Government in its capacity as a potentially responsible party. The amounts also include liabilities related to tax positions we have taken for which we have recorded liabilities in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes (see Notes 1 and 8). We estimated the timing of payments based on the expected completion of the related examinations by the applicable taxing authorities. 55 Table of Contents Purchase obligations related to operating activities include agreements and requirements contracts that give the supplier recourse to us for cancellation or nonperformance under the contract or contain terms that would subject us to liquidated damages. Such agreements and contracts may, for example, be related to direct materials, obligations to subcontractors and outsourcing arrangements. Total purchase obligations in the preceding table include approximately $20 billion related to contractual commitments entered into as a result of contracts we have with our U.S. Government customers. However, the U.S. Government would generally be required to pay us for any costs we incur relative to these commitments if they were to terminate the related contracts for convenience pursuant to the FAR. For example, if we had commitments to purchase goods and services that were entered into as a result of a specific contract we received from our U.S. Government customer and the customer terminated the contract for its convenience, any amounts we would be required to pay to settle the related commitments, as well as amounts previously incurred, would generally be reimbursed by the customer. This would also be true in cases where we perform subcontract work for a prime contractor under a U.S. Government contract. The termination for convenience language may also be included in contracts with foreign, state and local governments. We also have contracts with customers that do not include termination for convenience provisions, including contracts with commercial customers. Purchase obligations in the preceding table for capital expenditures generally include amounts for facilities and equipment related to customer contracts. We also may enter into industrial cooperation agreements, sometimes referred to as offset agreements, as a condition to obtaining orders for our products and services from certain customers in foreign countries. These agreements are designed to enhance the social and economic environment of the foreign country by requiring the contractor to promote investment in the country. Offset agreements may be satisfied through activities that do not require us to use cash, including transferring technology, providing manufacturing and other consulting support to in-country projects, and the purchase by third parties ( e.g., our vendors) of supplies from in-country vendors. These agreements may also be satisfied through our use of cash for such activities as purchasing supplies from in-country vendors, providing financial support for in-country projects, and building or leasing facilities for in-country operations. We do not commit to offset agreements until orders for our products or services are definitive. Offset programs generally extend over several years and may provide for penalties in the event we fail to perform in accordance with offset requirements. We have historically not been required to pay any such penalties. The amounts ultimately applied against our offset agreements are based on negotiations with the customer and generally require cash outlays that represent only a fraction of the original amount in the offset agreement. At December 31, 2008, we had outstanding offset agreements totaling $8.3 billion, primarily related to our Aeronautics segment, some of which extend through 2025. To the extent we have entered into purchase obligations at December 31, 2008 that also satisfy offset agreements, those amounts are included in the preceding table. In connection with the formation of ULA, we and The Boeing Company (Boeing) each committed to provide up to $25 million in additional capital contributions and $200 million in other financial support to ULA, as required. The non-capital financial support was required to be made in the form of a revolving credit facility between us and ULA or guarantees of ULA financing with third parties, in either case, to the extent necessary for ULA to meet its working capital needs. We agreed to provide this support for at least five years from December 1, 2006, the closing date of the transaction, and would expect to fund our requirements with cash on hand. To satisfy our non-capital financial support commitment, we and Boeing have put into place a revolving credit agreement with ULA, under which no amounts have been drawn. At December 31, 2008, we and Boeing had made $3 million in payments under our capital contribution commitments, and we expect to contribute the remaining commitment of $22 million each to ULA in the first half of 2009. Prior to those contributions, we expect to receive a dividend from ULA in a like amount. In addition, both we and Boeing have cross-indemnified each other related to certain financial support arrangements ( e.g. , letters of credit, surety bonds or foreign exchange contracts provided by either party) and guarantees by us and Boeing of the performance and financial obligations of ULA under certain of its launch service contracts. We believe ULA will be able to fully perform its obligations, as it has done through December 31, 2008, and that it will not be necessary to make payments under the cross-indemnities. In 2008, we and Boeing received from ULA a dividend of $100 million each. Prior to distribution of the dividend, we, Boeing and ULA entered into an agreement whereby, if ULA does not have sufficient cash resources and/or credit capacity to make payments under the inventory supply agreement it has with Boeing, both we and Boeing would provide to ULA, in the form of an additional capital contribution, amounts required for ULA to make such payments. Such capital contributions would not exceed the aggregate amount of dividends we received in 2008 and any others we may receive through June 1, 2009. We currently believe that ULA will have sufficient operating cash flows and credit capacity to meet its obligations such that we would not be required to make a contribution under this agreement. 56 Table of Contents We have entered into standby letter of credit agreements and other arrangements with financial institutions and customers mainly relating to advances received from customers and/or the guarantee of future performance on some of our contracts. In some cases, we may also guarantee the contractual performance of third parties. At December 31, 2008, we had outstanding letters of credit, surety bonds and guarantees, as follows: Commitment Expiration By Period (In millions) Total Commitment Less Than 1 Year (a) 1-3 Years (a) 3-5 Years (a) After 5 Years (a) Standby letters of credit $ 2,680 $ 2,245 $ 350 $ 64 $ 21 Surety bonds 417 395 22 Guarantees 25 13 9 3 Total commitments $ 3,122 $ 2,653 $ 381 $ 67 $ 21 (a) Approximately $2,157 million, $141 million, $23 million, and $5 million of standby letters of credit in the Less Than 1 Year, 1-3 Years, 3-5 Years, and After 5 Years periods, and approximately $42 million and $3 million of surety bonds in the Less Than 1 Year and 1-3 Years periods, are expected to renew for additional periods until completion of the contractual obligation. Included in the table above is approximately $145 million representing letter of credit amounts for which related obligations or liabilities are also recorded on the Balance Sheet, either as reductions of inventories, as customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred, or as other liabilities. Approximately $1.8 billion of the standby letters of credit in the table above were issued to secure advance payments received under an F-16 contract from an international customer. These letters of credit are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance, and the amount available will be reduced as certain events occur throughout the period of performance in accordance with the contract terms. Similar to the letters of credit for the F-16 contract, other letters of credit and surety bonds are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance. Under the agreement to sell LKEI and ILS (see Note 14), we were responsible for refunding customer advances to certain customers if launch services were not provided and ILS did not refund the advances. Our responsibility to refund the advances expired upon the successful completion of the final launch, which occurred in November 2008. Acquisition and Divestiture Activities We continuously strive to strengthen our portfolio of products and services to meet the current and future needs of our customers. We accomplish this not only internally, through our independent research and development activities, but also through acquisitions. We selectively pursue the acquisition of businesses and investments that complement our current portfolio and allow access to new customers or technologies. We have made a number of such niche acquisitions of businesses and investments in affiliates during the past several years. Conversely, we may also explore the divestiture of businesses, investments and real estate. If we were to decide to sell any such assets, the resulting gains, if any, would be recorded when the transactions are completed and losses, if any, would be recorded when the value of the related asset is determined to be impaired. Acquisitions We used approximately $233 million in 2008 for acquisition activities, including the acquisitions of businesses and investments in affiliates. Those activities included the acquisition of, among others, Eagle Group International, LLC, which provides logistics, information technology, training and healthcare services to the U.S. Department of Defense. We used approximately $337 million in 2007 for acquisition activities, including an additional contribution of $177 million related to our investment in ULA discussed below. Those activities also included the acquisition of, among others, Management Systems Designers, Inc., a provider of information technology (IT) and scientific solutions supporting government life science, national security, and other civil agency missions. We used approximately $1.1 billion in 2006 for acquisition activities including the acquisition of, among others, Pacific Architects and Engineers, Inc., a provider of services to support military readiness, peacekeeping missions, nation-building activities, and disaster relief services. In each year, the amounts used for acquisitions included certain payments related to businesses acquired in prior years. We accounted for the acquisitions under the purchase method of accounting, and therefore recorded purchase accounting adjustments by allocating the purchase price to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The acquisitions were not material to our consolidated results of operations in 2008, 2007 or 2006. 57 Table of Contents Divestitures There were no divestiture activities in 2008. During 2007 and 2006, we continued to execute the strategy to monetize certain of our equity investments and real estate by divesting of the following: Year ended December 31, 2007 Our remaining 20% interest in Comsat International, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $25 million in other income (expense), net, and increased net earnings by $16 million ($0.04 per share); and Certain land in California, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $25 million in other income (expense), net, and increased net earnings by $16 million ($0.04 per share). Year ended December 31, 2006 Our ownership interests in Lockheed Khrunichev Energia International, Inc. (LKEI) and International Launch Services, Inc. (ILS). The gain on the sale was deferred pending the disposition of guarantees associated with providing launch services for certain customers (see Note 14); 21 million shares of Inmarsat plc, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $127 million in other income (expense), net, and increased net earnings by $83 million ($0.19 per share); The assets of Space Imaging, LLC, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $23 million in other income (expense), net, and increased net earnings by $15 million ($0.03 per share); and Certain land in California and Florida, which resulted in an aggregate gain, net of state income taxes, of $51 million in other income (expense), net, and increased net earnings by $33 million ($0.08 per share). On December 1, 2006, we completed the formation of ULA with Boeing (see Note 14). As part of ULA formation, we contributed certain assets and liabilities related to our Atlas launch vehicle business. Our contribution, after completing working capital and conforming accounting adjustments and making an additional contribution of $177 million in 2007, totaled $367 million. We accounted for the transfer at net book value, with no gain or loss recognized. Our 50% ownership share of ULA net assets exceeded the book value of our investment by approximately $395 million, which we are recognizing ratably over 10 years as equity in net earnings (losses) of equity investees in other income (expense), net. Our investment in ULA totaled $428 million and $402 million at December 31, 2008 and 2007. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure of Market Risk We maintain active relationships with a broad and diverse group of domestic and international financial institutions. We believe that they provide us with access to the general and trade credit we require to conduct business. We continue to closely monitor the market environment and actively manage counterparty exposure to minimize the impact from any single credit provider while ensuring availability of, and access to, sufficient credit resources. Our main exposure to market risk relates to interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates and market prices on certain equity securities. Our financial instruments that are subject to interest rate risk principally include fixed-rate long-term debt. Our long-term debt portfolio bears interest at fixed rates. The estimated fair value of our long-term debt instruments was approximately $4.8 billion, compared with a carrying value of $4.1 billion. We use foreign currency exchange contracts to manage our exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, and generally do so in ways that qualify for hedge accounting treatment. These foreign currency exchange contracts hedge the fluctuations in cash flows associated with firm commitments or specific anticipated transactions contracted in foreign currencies. Related gains and losses on these contracts, to the extent they are effective hedges, are recognized in income at the same time the hedged transaction is recognized. To the extent the hedges are ineffective, gains and losses on the contracts are recognized in the current period. At December 31, 2008, the net fair value of foreign currency exchange contracts outstanding was an asset of $52 million (see Note 15). We evaluate the credit quality of potential counterparties to derivative transactions and only enter into agreements with those deemed to have minimal credit risk at the time the agreements are executed. Our foreign exchange hedge portfolio is diversified across several credit line banks. We carefully monitor the amount of exposure we have with any given bank. We periodically monitor changes to counterparty credit quality as well as our concentration of credit exposure to individual counterparties. We do not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes. We maintain a Rabbi Trust which includes investments to fund certain of our non-qualified deferred compensation plans. As of December 31, 2008, investments in the Rabbi Trust totaled $500 million and are reflected at fair value on our Balance Sheet in other assets. The Rabbi Trust holds investments in marketable equity securities that are exposed to price 58 Table of Contents changes and investments in fixed income securities that are exposed to changes in interest rates. Changes in the value of the Rabbi Trust are recognized in our earnings, in the caption Other Non-operating Income (Expense), Net. During 2008, we recorded net unrealized losses totaling $158 million related to the decrease in the value of the Rabbi Trust assets. A portion of the liabilities associated with the deferred compensation plans supported by the Rabbi Trust is also impacted by changes in the market price of our common stock and certain market indices. Changes in the value of the deferred compensation liabilities are recognized in the caption Unallocated Corporate Costs. The current portion of the deferred compensation plan liabilities is on our Balance Sheet in salaries, benefits, and payroll taxes, and the non-current portion of the liability is on our Balance Sheet in other liabilities. The resulting change in the value of the liabilities generally has the effect of partially offsetting the impact of changes in the value of the Rabbi Trust. During 2008, we recorded earnings of $32 million related to the decrease in the value of the deferred compensation liabilities. Recent Accounting Pronouncements There are a number of new accounting pronouncements and interpretations that will impact our financial statements and disclosures (see Note 1 under the caption Recent Accounting Pronouncements ). We do not expect that any of those pronouncements or interpretations upon adoption will have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows. Controls and Procedures We maintain disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, which are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our periodic filings with the SEC is reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules and forms, and to provide reasonable assurance that assets are safeguarded and transactions are properly executed and recorded. Our disclosure controls and procedures are also designed to ensure that information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO), as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. In designing and evaluating such controls and procedures, we recognize that any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives, and management necessarily is required to use its judgment in evaluating the cost-benefit relationship of possible controls and procedures. Also, we have investments in certain unconsolidated entities. As we do not control or manage these entities, our controls and procedures with respect to those entities are necessarily substantially more limited (in some cases, only that of a passive equity holder) than those we maintain with respect to our consolidated subsidiaries. We routinely review our system of internal control over financial reporting and make changes to our processes and systems to improve controls and increase efficiency, while ensuring that we maintain an effective internal control environment. Changes may include such activities as implementing new, more efficient systems, consolidating the activities of two or more business units, and migrating certain processes to our Shared Services centers. In addition, when we acquire new businesses, we review the controls and procedures of the acquired business as part of our integration activities. We performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, as of December 31, 2008. The evaluation was performed with the participation of senior management of each business segment and key Corporate functions, and under the supervision of the CEO and CFO. Based on this evaluation, the CEO and CFO concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of December 31, 2008. Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. During 2008, our management performed a separate evaluation of our internal control over financial reporting in accordance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, including performing self-assessment and monitoring procedures. Based on those activities and other evaluation procedures, our management, including the CEO and CFO, concluded that internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2008. Management report on our financial statements and internal control over financial reporting appears on page 60. In addition, the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting was audited by our independent registered public accounting firm. Their report appears on page 61. There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the most recently completed fiscal quarter that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 
