CIK: 936468
Company Name: LOCKHEED MARTIN CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2014-02-14


ITEM 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Business Overview We are a global security and aerospace company principally engaged in the research, design, development, manufacture, integration and sustainment of advanced technology systems, products and services. We also provide a broad range of management, engineering, technical, scientific, logistic, and information services. We serve both domestic and international customers with products and services that have defense, civil, and commercial applications, with our principal customers being agencies of the U.S. Government. In 2013, 82% of our $45.4 billion in net sales were from the U.S. Government, either as a prime contractor or as a subcontractor (including 61% from the Department of Defense (DoD)), 17% were from international customers (including foreign military sales (FMS) contracted through the U.S. Government), and 1% were from U.S. commercial and other customers. Our main areas of focus are in defense, space, intelligence, homeland security, and information technology, including cyber security. We operate in five business segments: Aeronautics, Information Systems & Global Solutions (IS&GS), Missiles and Fire Control (MFC), Mission Systems and Training (MST), and Space Systems. We organize our business segments based on the nature of the products and services offered. We are operating in an environment characterized by both increasing complexity in global security and continuing economic pressures in the U.S. and globally. A significant component of our strategy in this environment is to focus on program execution, improving the quality and predictability of the delivery of our products and services, and placing security capability quickly into the hands of both our domestic and international customers at affordable prices. Recognizing that our customers are resource constrained, we are endeavoring to develop and extend our portfolio domestically in a disciplined manner with a focus on adjacent markets close to our core capabilities, as well as growing our international sales. We continue to focus on affordability initiatives as demonstrated by our plan to close and consolidate several of our facilities as we announced in November 2013. We also expect to continue to invest in technologies to fulfill new mission requirements for our customers, and invest in our people so that we have the technical skills necessary to succeed without limiting our ability to return at least 50% of free cash flow 1 to our investors in the form of dividends and share repurchases. We expect 2014 net sales will decline slightly from 2013 due to projected lower net sales at Space Systems and IS&GS, partially offset by an anticipated increase in net sales at Aeronautics. We expect our 2014 segment operating profit will also decrease from 2013 at a slightly higher percentage rate than the decline in net sales due an anticipated decrease in segment operating profit at each of our business segments, with the exception of Aeronautics. Accordingly, segment operating profit margin is also expected to be lower than 2013 levels. For additional information related to trends in net sales and operating profit at our business segments, see the Business Segment Results of Operations section below. Industry Considerations U.S. Government Funding Constraints The U.S. Government, our principal customer, continues to face significant fiscal and economic challenges such as financial deficits, budget uncertainty, increasing debt levels, and an economy with restrained growth. In order to address these challenges, the U.S. Government continues to focus on discretionary spending, entitlement programs, taxes, and other initiatives to stimulate the economy, create jobs, and reduce the deficit. In doing so, the Administration and Congress must balance decisions regarding defense, homeland security, and other federal spending priorities in a constrained fiscal environment largely imposed by the Budget Control Act of 2011 (Budget Control Act). The Budget Control Act established limits on discretionary spending, which provided for reductions to planned defense spending of $487 billion over a 10 year period that began with government fiscal year (GFY) 2012 (a U.S. Government fiscal year starts on October 1 and ends on September 30). The Budget Control Act also provided for additional automatic spending reductions, known as sequestration, which went into effect on March 1, 2013, that would reduce planned defense spending by another $500 billion over a nine-year period that began in GFY 2013. These additional spending reductions are arbitrary as they would be applied across-the-board to numerous programs and contracts without regard to national priorities. While the defense budget will sustain the largest single reduction, other civil agencies and programs are also impacted by significant spending reductions. In light of the Budget Control Act and deficit reduction pressures, it is likely that discretionary spending by the U.S. Government will remain constrained for a number of years. 1 We define free cash flow as cash from operations as determined under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), less capital expenditures as presented on our Statements of Cash Flows. 24 Table of Contents For GFY 2013, which ended on September 30, 2013, sequestration resulted in a $37 billion reduction to the defense budget in addition to reductions as a result of the discretionary spending limits already imposed under the Budget Control Act. The impacts of sequestration in GFY 2013 were less than originally expected due to congressional actions that reduced the cuts as well as the DoD ability to allocate a portion of the reductions to prior year unobligated balances and multi-year investment appropriations. Accordingly, we have experienced minimal impacts to date. In December 2013, Congress and the Administration enacted the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 (Bipartisan Budget Act). Notably, the Bipartisan Budget Act increased the limits on discretionary spending for GFY 2014 and GFY 2015 imposed by the Budget Control Act, among other fiscal changes. In particular, the Bipartisan Budget Act allows for approximately $63 billion of additional funding, including approximately $22 billion and $9 billion for defense spending during GFY 2014 and GFY 2015, respectively, and similar amounts for nondefense programs over the same period. The revised defense spending limits are set at approximately $520 billion for GFY 2014 and approximately $521 billion for GFY 2015. This agreement allows for more certainty in the budget planning process and provides the DoD the flexibility to better address its priorities. However, the Bipartisan Budget Act retains the lower spending limits, including the across-the-board spending reduction methodology, for GFYs 2016 through 2021 as provided for in the Budget Control Act. As a result, there remains uncertainty regarding how sequester cuts beyond GFY 2015 will be applied as the DoD and other agencies may have significantly less flexibility regarding how to allocate cuts in future years. While we have not yet seen the specific budget allocations by program, we continue to believe that our portfolio of products will continue to be well supported in a strategically focused allocation of budget resources. On January 17, 2014, the U.S. Government passed its GFY 2014 budget to finance all activities through September 30, 2014, the end of its current fiscal year, after operating under continuing resolution temporary funding measures from October 1, 2013 to January 18, 2014. The budget provides discretionary defense spending at levels consistent with the planned defense spending limits in the Bipartisan Budget Act and eliminated much of the uncertainty and inefficiency in procuring products and services under the continuing resolution. Under continuing resolutions, partial-year funding is available at prior year levels, subject to certain restrictions, but new spending initiatives are not authorized. Other Matters While the recent budget actions provide a more measured and strategic approach to addressing the U.S. Government fiscal challenges, sequestration remains a long-term concern. If not further modified, sequestration could have significant negative impacts on our industry and company in future periods. There may be disruption of ongoing programs, impacts to our supply chain, contractual actions (including partial or complete terminations), potential facilities closures, and thousands of personnel reductions across the industry that will severely impact advanced manufacturing operations and engineering expertise, and accelerate the loss of skills and knowledge. Sequestration, or other budgetary cuts in lieu of sequestration, could have a material negative effect on our company as would any failure to address issues raised by the debt ceiling. Additionally, we are seeking to lessen our dependence on contracts with the U.S. Government by focusing on expanding into adjacent markets close to our core capabilities and growing international sales but may not be successful in this strategy. Despite the continued uncertainty surrounding U.S. Government budgets, the investments and acquisitions we have made in recent years have sought to align our businesses with what we believe are the most critical national priorities and mission areas. The possibility remains, however, that our programs could be materially reduced, extended, or terminated as a result of the U.S. Government continuing assessment of priorities, changes in government priorities, the implementation of sequestration (particularly in those circumstances where sequestration is implemented across-the-board without regard to national priorities), or other budget cuts in lieu of sequestration. Additionally, decreases in production volume associated with sequestration, or other budget cuts in lieu of sequestration, will increase unit costs making our products less affordable for both our domestic and international customers. Sequestration may also result in significant rescheduling or termination activity with our supplier base. Such activity could result in claims from our suppliers, which may include both the amount established in any settlement agreements, the costs of evaluating the supplier settlement proposals, and the costs of negotiating settlement agreements. Furthermore, sequestration, or other budgetary cuts in lieu of sequestration, could result in severance charges. We expect costs associated with claims from our suppliers and severance charges will be recovered from our customers. Generally, we expect that the impact of sequestration or other budget reductions in lieu of sequestration on our operating results will lag in certain of our businesses with longer cycles such as our Aeronautics and Space Systems business segments, and our products businesses within our MFC and MST business segments, due to our production contract backlog. However, our businesses with smaller, short-term contracts are the most susceptible to the impacts of budget reductions, such as our IS&GS business segment and certain services businesses within our MFC and MST business segments. 25 Table of Contents Other Business Considerations International Business A key component of our strategic plan is to grow our international sales. To accomplish this growth, we continue to focus on expanding our in-country presence and strengthening our relationships internationally through partnerships and local production joint technology offices. For example, in 2013 we acquired Amor Group, a United Kingdom-based company, and we opened a new in-country office in Saudi Arabia that will enable development of partnerships to create products and enhance our offerings in technology, aerospace, and security sectors. We conduct business with international customers primarily through our Aeronautics, MFC, and MST business segments. In our Aeronautics business segment, there remains strong international interest in the F-35 program. The F-35 program includes commitments from eight international partner countries and two international customers; as well as expressions of interest from other countries. The U.S. Government and the eight partner countries continue to work together on the design, testing, production, and sustainment of the F-35. The international role on the program is growing as we opened the final assembly and checkout facility in Italy and began international pilot and maintainer training in 2013. We delivered three F-35 aircraft to international partners in 2013, including two aircraft to the Netherlands and one aircraft to the United Kingdom. The number of F-35 aircraft for international customers in recent low-rate initial production (LRIP) contracts continues to increase, with the LRIP 6 and 7 contracts including new aircraft awards for Australia, Italy, Norway, and the United Kingdom. Other areas of international expansion at our Aeronautics business segment include the F-16 and C-130J programs. The award from Iraq in 2013 for 18 additional F-16 aircraft extends production through the middle of 2017. Also, we delivered the first C-130J Super Hercules aircraft to both the Republic of Tunisia and to Israel in 2013. The delivery to Tunisia marks the first to an African country. Our MFC business segment produces the Patriot Advanced Capability-3 (PAC-3) and Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) air and missile defense systems, which continue to generate significant international interest. The PAC-3 is an advanced missile defense system designed to intercept incoming airborne threats. During 2013, we received an award to provide PAC-3 missile defense equipment to Kuwait. Other international customers include Japan, Germany, the Netherlands, Taiwan, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). In 2013, we also finalized the multi-billion dollar award for the THAAD missile defense system from the UAE, which is the first international customer for this system. Other countries in the Middle East and the Asia-Pacific region have also expressed interest in our air and missile defense systems. In our MST business segment, we continue to experience international interest in the Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense System. We perform activities in the development, production, ship integration and test, and lifetime support for ships of international customers such as Canada, Japan, Spain, Korea, and Australia. In 2013, we received an award from Japan to upgrade processors and other equipment on their ballistic missile defense ships. The Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) is another significant program generating interest from potential international customers. Status of the F-35 Program The F-35 program consists of a development contract and multiple production contracts. The development contract is being performed concurrent with the production contracts. Concurrent performance of development and production contracts is used for complex programs to test aircraft, shorten the time to field systems, and achieve overall cost savings. We expect the development portion of the F-35 program will be substantially complete in 2017, with less significant efforts continuing into 2019. Production of the aircraft is expected to continue for many years given the U.S. Government current inventory objective of 2,443 aircraft for the Air Force, Marine Corps, and Navy; commitments from our eight international partners and two international customers; as well as expressions of interest from other countries. On the development contract, the U.S. Government continues to complete various operational tests, including ship trials, mission system evaluations, and weapons testing, with the aircraft surpassing 10,000 flight hours. In 2013, we reduced the profit booking rate on the development contract after revising our estimate of fees that we expect to earn on the contract as well as our estimates of the remaining costs to complete the development contract. These revisions collectively reduced profit by $85 million during 2013, which reflect the inception-to-date impact of the change in the profit booking rate. Progress continues to be made on the production of aircraft. In 2013, the F-35 program reached a significant milestone as we completed the assembly of the 100th aircraft. During 2013, we delivered 35 aircraft to our domestic and international partners, resulting in total deliveries of 73 production aircraft as of December 31, 2013. We have 93 production aircraft in backlog as of December 31, 2013, including orders from our international partners. 26 Table of Contents Given the size and complexity of the F-35 program, we anticipate that there will be continual reviews related to aircraft performance, program schedule, cost, and requirements as part of the DoD, Congressional, and international partners oversight and budgeting processes. Current program challenges include, but are not limited to, supplier and partner performance, software development, level of cost associated with lifecycle operations and sustainment, receiving funding for production contracts on a timely basis, executing future flight tests, and findings resulting from testing. Portfolio Shaping Activities We continuously strive to strengthen our portfolio of products and services to meet the current and future needs of our customers. We accomplish this in part by our independent research and development activities, and through acquisition, divestiture, and internal realignment activities. Internal realignments are designed to more fully leverage existing capabilities and enhance development and delivery of products and services. We selectively pursue the acquisition of businesses and investments at attractive valuations that will expand or complement our current portfolio and allow access to new customers or technologies. We have made a number of niche acquisitions of businesses and investments in affiliates during the past several years. We also may explore the divestiture of businesses. In pursuing our business strategy, we routinely conduct discussions, evaluate targets, and enter into agreements regarding possible acquisitions, divestitures, ventures, and equity investments. Acquisitions We paid $269 million and $259 million in 2013 and 2012 for acquisition activities, primarily related to the acquisition of businesses. In 2013, we acquired Amor Group, a United Kingdom-based company specializing in information technology, civil government services, and the energy market. This acquisition is aligned with our strategy to grow international sales and has been included in our IS&GS business segment. In 2012, we acquired Chandler/May, Inc. (Chandler/May), CDL Systems Ltd. (CDL), and Procerus Technologies, L.C. (Procerus). These companies specialize in the design, development, manufacturing, control, and support of advanced unmanned systems, which expand our offerings in support of our customers increased emphasis on advanced unmanned systems and are consistent with our strategy to maintain a portfolio of advanced technology options. These companies are part of our MST business segment where they have been integrated into our portfolio of unmanned systems and technologies to align their product and service offerings to the U.S. Army. In 2011, we paid $624 million for acquisition activities, primarily related to the acquisitions of QTC Holdings Inc. (QTC) and Sim-Industries B.V. (Sim-Industries). QTC provides outsourced medical evaluation services to the U.S. Government and has been included within our IS&GS business segment. Sim-Industries designs, develops, and manufactures full-motion and fixed-based civil aviation flight simulators for a wide range of airline customers and independent pilot training centers worldwide and is part of our MST business segment. These companies complement our core capabilities and align with our strategy to expand into closely related markets and expand our customer base. For additional information, see Note 14 Acquisitions and Divestitures of our consolidated financial statements. Divestitures In pursuing our business strategies, we have also divested certain businesses over the past three years. Recent divestitures consisted of Savi Technology, Inc. (Savi) in 2012 and Pacific Architects and Engineers, Inc. (PAE) in 2011. For additional information, see Note 14 Acquisitions and Divestitures of our consolidated financial statements. 27 Table of Contents Consolidated Results of Operations Since our operating cycle is long-term and involves many types of contracts for the design, development, and manufacturing of products and related activities with varying delivery schedules, the results of operations of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of recorded sales and profits, may not be indicative of future operating results. The following discussions of comparative results among years should be viewed in this context. All per share amounts cited in these discussions are presented on a per diluted share basis, unless otherwise noted. Our consolidated results of operations were as follows (in millions, except per share data): 2013 2012 2011 Operating results Net sales $ 45,358 $ 47,182 $ 46,499 Cost of sales (41,171 ) (42,986 ) (42,755) Other income, net 318 238 276 Operating profit 4,505 4,434 4,020 Interest expense (350 ) (383 ) (354) Other non-operating income (expense), net 21 (35) Income tax expense (1,205 ) (1,327 ) (964) Net earnings from continuing operations 2,950 2,745 2,667 Net earnings (loss) from discontinued operations 31 (12) Net earnings $ 2,981 $ 2,745 $ 2,655 Diluted earnings (loss) per common share Continuing operations $ 9.04 $ 8.36 $ 7.85 Discontinued operations .09 (.04) Total $ 9.13 $ 8.36 $ 7.81 Amounts reported in other income, net (primarily our share of earnings or losses from equity method investees) on our Statements of Earnings are included in the segment operating profit and segment operating margins of our Business Segment Results of Operations but are excluded from the consolidated net sales and cost of sales tables below. Net Sales Products sales are predominantly generated in our Aeronautics, MFC, MST, and Space Systems business segments, and most of our services sales are generated in our IS&GS and MFC business segments. Our consolidated net sales were as follows (in millions): 2013 2012 2011 Net sales Products $35,691 $37,817 $36,925 Services 9,667 9,365 9,574 Total net sales $45,358 $47,182 $46,499 Substantially all of our contracts are accounted for using the percentage-of-completion method of accounting. Under the percentage-of-completion method, we record net sales on contracts based upon our progress towards completion on a particular contract, as well as our estimate of the profit to be earned at completion. The following discussion of material changes in our consolidated net sales should be read in tandem with the following discussion of changes in our consolidated cost of sales and our Business Segment Results of Operations section because, due to the nature of percentage-of-completion accounting, changes in our sales are typically accompanied by a corresponding change in our cost of sales. Products Sales Our products sales represent about 80% of our net sales for both 2013 and 2012. Products sales decreased $2.1 billion, or 6%, in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily due to lower volume and deliveries. Products sales decreased about $915 million at Aeronautics primarily due to fewer aircraft deliveries (primarily F-16 and C-130) and lower volume and risk retirements on F-22 due to completion of aircraft deliveries in 2012, partially offset by increased volume and risk retirements on F-35 production contracts and increased aircraft deliveries on the C-5 program; about $750 million at IS&GS for various programs due to lower volume (such as Next Generation Identification (NGI) and En Route Automation Modernization (ERAM) 28 Table of Contents programs); about $440 million at MST due to fewer deliveries (primarily Persistent Threat Detection Systems (PTDS) as final surveillance system deliveries occurred during the second quarter of 2012) and lower volume (primarily integrated warfare systems and sensors programs); and about $405 million at Space Systems due to lower volume (primarily commercial satellites and the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle (Orion) program) partially offset by increased volume (primarily various government satellite programs). The decreases were partially offset by higher products sales of about $380 million at MFC due to increased volume and risk retirements (primarily THAAD and deliveries of PAC-3). Our products sales represent about 80% of our net sales for both 2012 and 2011. Products sales increased $892 million, or 2%, in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to higher volume and deliveries, as well as higher risk retirements on certain programs. Products sales increased about $555 million at Aeronautics due to increased volume and risk retirements on F-35 production contracts and deliveries (primarily F-16 and C-5), partially offset by decreased volume and risk retirements (primarily F-22); about $510 million at MST due to increased deliveries (primarily PTDS) and increased volume (primarily LCS); about $225 million at Space Systems due to increased volume (primarily commercial satellites and Orion); and about $100 million at MFC due to increased volume (primarily THAAD and PAC-3). These increases partially were offset by lower products sales of about $495 million at IS&GS due to the substantial completion of certain programs (such as Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) and U.K. Census). Services Sales Our services sales represent about 20% of our net sales for 2013 and 2012. Services sales increased $302 million, or 3%, in 2013 compared to 2012. Services sales increased about $270 million at IS&GS primarily due to the start-up of certain programs (such as the Defense Information Systems Agency Global Information Grid Services Management-Operations (DISA GSM-O) and the National Science Foundation Antarctic Support); and about $85 million at Aeronautics primarily due to increased sustainment activities (primarily F-16). The increases were partially offset by lower services sales of about $80 million at MFC for various technical services programs due to lower volume, partially offset by various fire control programs (primarily Special Operations Forces Contractor Logistics Support Services (SOF CLSS)) due to higher volume. Services sales for 2013 were comparable to 2012 at both MST and Space Systems. Our services sales represent about 20% of our net sales for 2012 and 2011. Services sales decreased $209 million, or 2%, in 2012 compared to 2011. Services sales decreased about $105 million at MFC primarily due to lower volume and risk retirements on various technical services programs. Services sales decreased about $60 million at MST primarily due to lower volume on various training services programs. Services sales decreased about $40 million at IS&GS primarily due to the substantial completion of the Outsourcing Desktop Initiative for NASA (ODIN) during 2011 and lower volume on the Hanford Mission Support (Hanford) contract, partially offset by higher net sales from QTC, which was acquired in the fourth quarter of 2011. Cost of Sales Cost of sales, for both products and services, consist of materials, labor, and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs (overhead and general and administrative). For each of our contracts, we monitor the nature and amount of costs at the contract level, which form the basis for estimating our total costs at the completion of the contract. Our consolidated cost of sales were as follows (in millions): 2013 2012 2011 Cost of sales Cost of products sales $ 31,346 $ 33,495 $ 32,968 % of products sales 87.8 % 88.6 % 89.3% Cost of services sales 8,588 8,383 8,514 % of services sales 88.8 % 89.5 % 88.9% Goodwill impairment charge 195 Severance charges 201 48 136 Other unallocated costs 841 1,060 1,137 Total cost of sales $ 41,171 $ 42,986 $ 42,755 Due to the nature of percentage-of-completion accounting, changes in our cost of products and services sales are typically accompanied by changes in our net sales. The following discussion of material changes in our consolidated cost of products and services sales should be read in tandem with the preceding discussion of changes in our consolidated net sales and with our Business Segment Results of Operations section. We have not identified any developing trends in cost of products and services sales that would have a material impact on our future operations. 29 Table of Contents Cost of Products Sales Cost of products sales decreased $2.1 billion, or 6%, in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily due to lower volume and deliveries. Cost of products sales decreased about $770 million at Aeronautics due to fewer aircraft deliveries (primarily F-16 and C-130) and lower volume (primarily F-22), partially offset by increased volume for F-35 production contracts, increased aircraft deliveries and the impact of reducing the profit booking rate in the third quarter of 2013 for the C-5 program and lower risk retirements on various programs (primarily C-130); about $685 million at IS&GS for various programs primarily due to decreased volume; about $570 million at MST primarily due to fewer deliveries and net increased risk retirements for the PTDS program and various integrated warfare systems and sensors programs and for the favorable resolution of certain contract cost matters (including the terminated presidential helicopter program); and about $315 million at Space Systems due to lower volume (primarily commercial satellites and Orion). The decreases were partially offset by higher cost of products sales of about $190 million at MFC due to increased volume (primarily THAAD and deliveries of PAC-3), partially offset by various other programs due increased risk retirements (primarily fire control programs). The 0.8% decrease in the percentage of cost of products sales relative to products sales in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily was due to higher risk retirements (primarily at MFC and MST) and the favorable resolution of contractual matters at MST. Cost of products sales increased $527 million, or 2%, in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to higher volume and deliveries. Cost of products sales increased about $520 million at Aeronautics due to increased volume (primarily F-35 production contracts) and increased deliveries (primarily F-16 and C-5); about $485 million at MST due to increased deliveries (primarily PTDS) and volume (primarily LCS), partially offset by reserves of about $55 million for contract cost matters on certain contracts recorded in the fourth quarter of 2011 (including the terminated presidential helicopter program); and about $180 million at Space Systems due to increased volume (primarily commercial satellites programs, Orion and various strategic and defensive missile programs). The increases were partially offset by lower cost of products sales of about $530 million at IS&GS primarily due to the substantial completion of various programs during 2011 and lower volume on various other programs; and about $70 million at MFC due to higher risk retirements (primarily tactical missile and fire control programs) and the favorable resolution of contractual matters, partially offset by increased deliveries (PAC-3) and volume (THAAD). The 0.7% decrease in the percentage of cost of products sales relative to products sales in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily was due to higher risk retirements (primarily at MFC) as well as the favorable resolution of contractual matters at MFC and higher risk retirements and lower reserves on ship and aviation system programs at MST. Cost of Services Sales Our cost of services sales increased $205 million, or 2%, in 2013 compared to 2012. Most of our cost of services sales are in the IS&GS and MFC business segments. The increase in cost of services sales was primarily attributable to higher cost of services sales at our IS&GS and Aeronautics business segments partially offset by lower cost of services sales at our MFC business segment. Cost of services sales increased about $245 million at IS&GS primarily due to the start-up of various programs. Cost of services sales increased about $40 million at Aeronautics primarily due to increased sustainment activities (primarily F-16). Cost of services sales decreased about $75 million at MFC primarily due to lower volume of various technical services programs, partially offset by higher volume from various fire control programs (primarily SOF CLSS). The 0.7% decrease in the percentage of cost of services sales relative to services sales in 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily due to higher risk retirements on sustainment contracts at Aeronautics. Our cost of services sales decreased $131 million, or 2%, in 2012 compared to 2011. The decrease in cost of services sales primarily was attributable to lower cost of services sales at our MFC and MST business segments, partially offset by higher cost of services sales at our IS&GS business segment. Cost of services sales decreased approximately $105 million at MFC primarily due to lower volume on various technical services programs. Cost of services sales decreased approximately $90 million at MST primarily due to lower volume on various training services programs. Cost of services sales increased approximately $80 million at IS&GS primarily due to higher net sales from QTC, which was acquired in the fourth quarter of 2011, and various other services programs partially offset by lower costs from the substantial completion of ODIN in 2011 and lower volume on the Hanford contract. The 0.6% increase in the percentage of cost of services sales relative to services sales in 2012 compared to 2011 was primarily due to risk retirements on the ODIN and Hanford contracts in 2011. Goodwill Impairment Charge In the fourth quarter of 2013, we recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $195 million, net of state tax benefits, which reduced our net earnings by $176 million ($.54 per share). The charge related to the Technical Services reporting unit within our MFC business segment and was due to the continuing impact of defense budget reductions and related competitive pressures on the Technical Services business, which typically has smaller customer contracts of a shorter duration. For additional information, see the Critical Accounting Policies Goodwill section below and Note 1 Significant Accounting Policies of our consolidated financial statements. 30 Table of Contents Restructuring Charges 2013 Actions During 2013, we recorded charges related to certain severance actions totaling $201 million, net of state tax benefits, of which $83 million, $37 million, and $81 million related to our IS&GS, MST, and Space Systems business segments. These charges reduced our net earnings by $130 million ($.40 per share) and primarily related to a plan we committed to in November 2013 to close and consolidate certain facilities and reduce our total workforce by approximately 4,000 positions within our IS&GS, MST, and Space Systems business segments. These charges also include $30 million related to certain severance actions at our IS&GS business segment that occurred in the first quarter of 2013, which were subsequently paid in 2013. The November 2013 plan resulted from a strategic review of these businesses facility capacity and future workload projections and is intended to better align our organization and cost structure and improve the affordability of our products and services given the continued decline in U.S. Government spending as well as the rapidly changing competitive and economic landscape. Upon separation, terminated employees will receive lump-sum severance payments primarily based on years of service. During 2013, we paid approximately $15 million in severance payments associated with these actions, with the remainder expected to be paid through the middle of 2015. In addition to the severance charges described above, we expect to incur accelerated and incremental costs (e.g., accelerated depreciation expense related to long-lived assets at the sites to be closed, relocation of equipment and other employee related costs) of approximately $15 million, $50 million, and $135 million at our IS&GS, MST, and Space Systems business segments related to the facility closures and consolidations. The accelerated and incremental costs will be expensed as incurred in the respective business segment results of operations through their completion in 2015. We expect to recover a substantial amount of the restructuring charges through the pricing of our products and services to the U.S. Government and other customers in future periods, with the impact included in the respective business segment results of operations. Of the total accelerated and incremental costs to be incurred mentioned above, we expect $25 million, net of recoveries, at MST and $55 million, net of recoveries, at Space Systems will be incurred in 2014. Also, we expect the restructuring charges will reduce our 2014 cash flow from operations by approximately $150 million, mostly due to expected severance payments in 2014. 2012 and 2011 Actions During 2012, we recorded charges related to certain severance actions totaling $48 million, net of state tax benefits, of which $25 million related to our Aeronautics business segment and $23 million related to the reorganization of our former Electronic Systems business segment. These charges reduced our net earnings by $31 million ($.09 per share) and consisted of severance costs associated with the elimination of certain positions through either voluntary or involuntary actions. These severance actions resulted from cost reduction initiatives to better align our organization with changing economic conditions. Upon separation, terminated employees received lump-sum severance payments primarily based on years of service, all of which were paid in 2013. During 2011, we recorded charges related to certain severance actions totaling $136 million, net of state tax benefits, of which $49 million, $48 million, and $39 million related to our Aeronautics, Space Systems, and our IS&GS business segments and Corporate Headquarters. These charges reduced our net earnings by $88 million ($.26 per share) and consisted of severance costs associated with the elimination of certain positions through either voluntary or involuntary actions. These severance actions resulted from a strategic review of these businesses and our Corporate Headquarters and are intended to better align our organization and cost structure with changing economic conditions. The workforce reductions at the business segments also reflected changes in program lifecycles, where several of our major programs were either transitioning out of development and into production or were ending. Upon separation, terminated employees received lump-sum severance payments based on years of service. During 2011, we made approximately half of the severance payments associated with these 2011 severance actions, and paid the remaining amounts in 2012. Other Unallocated Costs Other unallocated costs principally include FAS/CAS pension expense, stock-based compensation, and other corporate costs. These costs are not allocated to the business segments and, therefore, are excluded from the costs of products and services sales (see Note 4 Information on Business Segments of our consolidated financial statements for a description of these items). The decreases of $219 million and $77 million in other unallocated costs from 2012 to 2013 and 2011 to 2012 31 Table of Contents were primarily attributable to the decrease in FAS/CAS pension expense, partially offset by fluctuations in other costs associated with various corporate items, none of which were individually significant. We expect FAS/CAS pension income of $345 million in 2014 as further discussed in the Critical Accounting Policies - Postretirement Benefit Plans section below. Other Income, Net Other income, net for 2013 was $318 million, compared to $238 million in 2012 and $276 million in 2011. The changes between years primarily were due to fluctuations in equity earnings in investees in our Space Systems business segment, as discussed in the Business Segment Results of Operations section below. Interest Expense Interest expense for 2013 was $350 million, compared to $383 million in 2012 and $354 million in 2011. The decrease from 2012 to 2013 was primarily attributable to lower interest rates on our outstanding debt from the December 2012 debt exchange (Note 9). The increase from 2011 to 2012 was primarily due to increased interest expense from the $2.0 billion issuance of long-term debt in September 2011, partially offset by the redemption of $500 million in certain long-term notes in October 2011 (Note 9). Other Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net Other non-operating income, net decreased $21 million from 2012 to 2013 primarily due to a gain from the sale of an investment in 2012. Other non-operating income (expense), net was $21 million in 2012 and $(35) million in 2011, with the change between years primarily due to premiums of $48 million on early extinguishments of debt that occurred in 2011 (Note 9). Income Tax Expense Our effective income tax rate from continuing operations was 29.0% for 2013, 32.6% for 2012, and 26.5% for 2011. The rates generally benefit from tax deductions for U.S. manufacturing activities and tax deductions for dividends paid to our defined contribution plans with an employee stock ownership plan feature. The U.S. manufacturing deduction benefit for 2013 and 2011 reduced our effective tax rate by approximately two percentage points as compared to 2012. These fluctuations between years occurred because our tax-deductible discretionary pension contributions of $2.5 billion in 2012, which reduced U.S. manufacturing deduction benefits by $59 million ($.18 per share), were significantly higher than in 2013 or 2011. Our effective income tax rate for 2013 was reduced by approximately two percentage points because of U.S. research and development (R&D) tax credits. On January 2, 2013, the President signed into law the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012, which retroactively reinstated the R&D tax credit for two years, from January 1, 2012 through December 31, 2013. As the effects of tax law changes are recognized in the period in which new legislation is enacted, $37 million ($.11 per share) of tax benefit attributable to 2012 was recorded during 2013, in addition to $39 million ($.12 per share) of tax benefit attributable to 2013. Since we recorded two years of R&D tax credit in 2013, we expect our effective tax rate to increase in 2014 whether or not Congress reenacts the R&D tax credit for 2014. Our effective tax rate for 2013 was increased by approximately one percentage point due to the non-cash goodwill impairment charge recorded in the fourth quarter of 2013 (Note 1), as only a portion of the charge will qualify for a tax deduction. Our effective income tax rate for 2011 was reduced by approximately two and one-half percentage points because in April 2011 the U.S. Congressional Joint Committee on Taxation completed its review of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Appeals Division resolution of certain adjustments related to our tax years 2003 through 2008. As a result, we recognized additional tax benefits and reduced our income tax expense for 2011 by $89 million ($.26 per share). Our effective income tax rate for 2011 also was reduced by approximately one percentage point due to R&D tax credits. Future changes in tax law could significantly impact the provision for income taxes, the amount of taxes payable, and the deferred tax asset and liability balances. Recent proposals to lower the U.S. corporate income tax rate would require us to reduce our net deferred tax assets upon enactment of the related tax legislation, with a corresponding material, one-time 32 Table of Contents increase to income tax expense, but our income tax expense and payments would be materially reduced in subsequent years. Our net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2013 and 2012 were $3.9 billion and $6.1 billion, based on a 35% Federal statutory income tax rate, and primarily relate to our postretirement benefit plans. If the Federal statutory income tax rate had been lowered to 25% at December 31, 2013, our net deferred tax assets would have been reduced by $1.1 billion, and we would have recorded a corresponding, one time increase in income tax expense of $1.1 billion. The amount of net deferred tax assets will change periodically based on several factors, including the annual measurement of our postretirement benefit plan obligations and actual cash contributions to our postretirement benefit plans. Net Earnings from Continuing Operations We reported net earnings from continuing operations of $2.95 billion ($9.04 per share) in 2013, $2.75 billion ($8.36 per share) in 2012, and $2.67 billion ($7.85 per share) in 2011. Both net earnings from continuing operations and earnings per share were affected by the factors discussed above. Net Earnings (Loss) from Discontinued Operations Net earnings from discontinued operations for 2013 included a benefit of $31 million resulting from the resolution of certain tax matters related to a business previously sold. Discontinued operations for 2011 included the operating results and other adjustments of Savi, a logistics business sold in 2012 that was in our former Electronic Systems business segment, and PAE, a business sold in 2011 that was formerly within our IS&GS business segment. Net loss from discontinued operations was $12 million ($.04 per share) in 2011, and included a deferred tax asset of $66 million that we expected to realize on the sale of Savi because our tax basis was higher than our book basis. This tax benefit was largely offset by operating losses and other adjustments. For more information, see Note 14 Acquisitions and Divestitures of our consolidated financial statements. Business Segment Results of Operations We operate in five business segments: Aeronautics, IS&GS, MFC, MST, and Space Systems. We organize our business segments based on the nature of the products and services offered. Net sales of our business segments exclude intersegment sales, as these activities are eliminated in consolidation. Intercompany transactions are generally negotiated under terms and conditions that share many similar characteristics (e.g., contract structures, funding profiles, target cost values, contract progress reports) with our third-party contracts, primarily with the U.S. Government. Operating profit of our business segments includes our share of earnings or losses from equity method investees because the operating activities of the equity method investees are closely aligned with the operations of those business segments. Operating profit of our business segments excludes the FAS/CAS pension adjustment described below; expense for stock-based compensation; the effects of items not considered part of management evaluation of segment operating performance, such as charges related to goodwill impairment (Note 1) and significant severance actions (Note 2); gains or losses from divestitures (Note 14); the effects of certain legal settlements; corporate costs not allocated to our business segments; and other miscellaneous corporate activities. These items are included in the reconciling item Unallocated expenses, net between operating profit from our business segments and our consolidated operating profit. The results of operations of our business segments include pension expense only as determined and funded in accordance with U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS). The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension expense calculated in accordance with GAAP and pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS. CAS governs the extent to which pension costs can be allocated to and recovered on U.S. Government contracts. The CAS cost is recovered through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts and, therefore, is recognized in each of our business segments net sales and cost of sales. 33 Table of Contents The operating results in the following tables exclude businesses included in discontinued operations (Note 14) for all years presented. Summary operating results for each of our business segments were as follows (in millions): 2013 2012 2011 Net sales Aeronautics $ 14,123 $ 14,953 $ 14,362 Information Systems & Global Solutions 8,367 8,846 9,381 Missiles and Fire Control 7,757 7,457 7,463 Mission Systems and Training 7,153 7,579 7,132 Space Systems 7,958 8,347 8,161 Total net sales $ 45,358 $ 47,182 $ 46,499 Operating profit Aeronautics $ 1,612 $ 1,699 $ 1,630 Information Systems & Global Solutions 759 808 874 Missiles and Fire Control 1,431 1,256 1,069 Mission Systems and Training 905 737 645 Space Systems 1,045 1,083 1,063 Total business segment operating profit 5,752 5,583 5,281 Unallocated expenses, net FAS/CAS pension adjustment FAS pension expense (1,948 ) (1,941 ) (1,821) Less: CAS cost 1,466 1,111 899 FAS/CAS pension expense (a) (482 ) (830 ) (922) Goodwill impairment charge (b) (195 ) Severance charges (c) (201 ) (48 ) (136) Stock-based compensation (189 ) (167 ) (157) Other, net (180 ) (104 ) (46) Total unallocated expenses, net (1,247 ) (1,149 ) (1,261) Total consolidated operating profit $ 4,505 $ 4,434 $ 4,020 (a) We expect FAS/CAS pension income in 2014 of about $345 million as further discussed in the Critical Accounting Policies - Postretirement Benefit Plans section below. (b) We recognized a non-cash goodwill impairment charge related to the Technical Services reporting unit within our MFC business segment. For more information, see Note 1 Significant Accounting Policies of our consolidated financial statements. (c) See Note 2 Restructuring Charges of our consolidated financial statements for information on charges related to certain severance actions at our business segments and Corporate Headquarters. Severance charges for initiatives that are not significant are included in business segment operating profit. The following segment discussions also include information relating to backlog for each segment. Backlog was approximately $82.6 billion, $82.3 billion, and $80.7 billion at December 31, 2013, 2012, and 2011. These amounts included both funded backlog (firm orders for which funding has been both authorized and appropriated by the customer Congress in the case of U.S. Government agencies) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding has not yet been appropriated). Backlog does not include unexercised options or task orders to be issued under indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contracts. Funded backlog was approximately $55.0 billion at December 31, 2013. Management evaluates performance on our contracts by focusing on net sales and operating profit, and not by type or amount of operating expense. Consequently, our discussion of business segment performance focuses on net sales and operating profit, consistent with our approach for managing the business. This approach is consistent with the overall life cycle of our contracts, as management assesses the bidding of each contract by focusing on net sales and operating profit, and monitors performance on our contracts in a similar manner through their completion. We regularly provide customers with reports of our costs as the contract progresses. The cost information in the reports is accumulated in a manner specified by the requirements of each contract. For example, cost data provided to our customer for a product would typically align to the subcomponents of that product (such as a wing-box on an aircraft), and for services would align to the type of work being performed (such as help-desk support). Our contracts generally are cost-based, which allows for the recovery of costs in the pricing of our products and services. Most of our contracts are bid and negotiated with our customers under circumstances in which we are required to disclose our estimated costs to provide the product or service. 34 Table of Contents This approach for negotiating contracts with our U.S. Government customers generally allows for the recovery of our costs. We also may enter into long-term supply contracts for certain materials or components to coincide with the production schedule of certain products and to ensure their availability at known unit prices. Many of our contracts span several years and include highly complex technical requirements. At the outset of a contract, we identify and monitor risks to the achievement of the technical, schedule, and cost aspects of the contract, and assess the effects of those risks on our estimates of total costs to complete the contract. The estimates consider the technical requirements (e.g., a newly-developed product versus a mature product), the schedule and associated tasks (e.g., the number and type of milestone events), and costs (e.g., material, labor, subcontractor and overhead). The initial profit booking rate of each contract considers risks surrounding the ability to achieve the technical requirements, schedule, and costs in the initial estimated costs at completion. Profit booking rates may increase during the performance of the contract if we successfully retire risks surrounding the technical, schedule and cost aspects of the contract. Conversely, our profit booking rates may decrease if the estimated costs to complete the contract increase. All of the estimates are subject to change during the performance of the contract and may affect the profit booking rate. We have a number of programs that are designated as classified by the U.S. Government which cannot be specifically described. The operating results of these classified programs are included in our consolidated and business segment results, and are subjected to the same oversight and internal controls as our other programs. Our net sales are primarily derived from long-term contracts for products and services provided to the U.S. Government as well as FMS contracted through the U.S. Government. We account for these contracts, as well as product contracts with non-U.S. Government customers, using the percentage-of-completion method of accounting, which represent substantially all of our net sales. We derive our remaining net sales from contracts to provide services to non-U.S. Government customers, which we account for under the services method of accounting. Under the percentage-of-completion method of accounting, we record sales on contracts based upon our progress towards completion on a particular contract as well as our estimate of the profit to be earned at completion. Cost-reimbursable contracts provide for the payment of allowable costs plus a fee. For fixed-priced contracts, net sales and cost of sales are recognized as products are delivered or as costs are incurred. Due to the nature of the percentage-of-completion method of accounting, changes in our cost of sales are typically accompanied by a related change in our net sales. In the discussion of comparative segment results, changes in net sales and operating profit generally are expressed in terms of volume. Changes in volume refer to increases or decreases in sales resulting from varying production activity levels, deliveries, or service levels on individual contracts. Volume changes typically include a corresponding change in segment operating profit based on the current profit booking rate for a particular contract. In addition, comparability of our sales, segment operating profit, and segment operating margins may be impacted by changes in profit booking rates on our contracts accounted for using the percentage-of-completion method of accounting. Increases in the profit booking rates, typically referred to as risk retirements, usually relate to revisions in the total estimated costs at completion that reflect improved conditions on a particular contract. Conversely, conditions on a particular contract may deteriorate resulting in an increase in the estimated costs at completion and a reduction of the profit booking rate. Increases or decreases in profit booking rates are recognized in the current period and reflect the inception-to-date effect of such changes. Segment operating profit and segment operating margins may also be impacted, favorably or unfavorably, by other matters such as the resolution of contractual matters; restructuring charges, except for significant severance actions as mentioned above; cost recoveries on all restructuring charges; reserves for disputes; asset impairments; and insurance recoveries; among others. Segment operating profit and items such as risk retirements, reductions of profit booking rates, or other matters are presented net of state income taxes. Our consolidated net adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments and other matters, increased segment operating profit, net of state income taxes, by approximately $2.1 billion, $1.9 billion, and $1.6 billion for 2013, 2012, and 2011. The increase in our consolidated net adjustments for 2013 as compared to 2012 primarily was due to an increase in profit booking rate adjustments at our MST and MFC business segments and, to a lesser extent, the increase in the favorable resolution of contractual matters for the corporation. The increase in our consolidated net adjustments for 2012 as compared to 2011 primarily was due to an increase in profit booking rate adjustments and the favorable resolution of contractual matters at our MST and MFC business segments. The consolidated net adjustments for 2013 and 2012 are inclusive of approximately $600 million and $500 million in unfavorable items, which include a significant profit reduction on the F-35 development contract in both years, as well as a significant profit reduction on the C-5 program in 2013, each as described in our Aeronautics business segment results of operations discussion below. Unfavorable items in 2012 were about $100 million higher than 2011, primarily due to a significant profit reduction on the F-35 development contract in 2012 as mentioned above. 35 Table of Contents Aeronautics Our Aeronautics business segment is engaged in the research, design, development, manufacture, integration, sustainment, support, and upgrade of advanced military aircraft, including combat and air mobility aircraft, unmanned air vehicles, and related technologies. Aeronautics major programs include the F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter, C-130 Hercules, F-16 Fighting Falcon, F-22 Raptor, and the C-5M Super Galaxy. Aeronautics operating results included the following (in millions): 2013 2012 2011 Net sales $ 14,123 $ 14,953 $ 14,362 Operating profit 1,612 1,699 1,630 Operating margins 11.4 % 11.4 % 11.3% Backlog at year-end 28,000 30,100 30,500 2013 compared to 2012 Aeronautics net sales for 2013 decreased $830 million, or 6%, compared to 2012. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower net sales of approximately $530 million for the F-16 program due to fewer aircraft deliveries (13 aircraft delivered in 2013 compared to 37 delivered in 2012) partially offset by aircraft configuration mix; about $385 million for the C-130 program due to fewer aircraft deliveries (25 aircraft delivered in 2013 compared to 34 in 2012) partially offset by increased sustainment activities; approximately $255 million for the F-22 program, which includes about $205 million due to decreased production volume as final aircraft deliveries were completed during the second quarter of 2012 and $50 million from the favorable resolution of a contractual matter during the second quarter of 2012; and about $270 million for various other programs (primarily sustainment activities) due to decreased volume. The decreases were partially offset by higher net sales of about $295 million for F-35 production contracts due to increased production volume and risk retirements; approximately $245 million for the C-5 program due to increased aircraft deliveries (six aircraft delivered in 2013 compared to four in 2012) and other modernization activities; and about $70 million for the F-35 development contract due to increased volume. Aeronautics operating profit for 2013 decreased $87 million, or 5%, compared to 2012. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower operating profit of about $85 million for the F-22 program, which includes approximately $50 million from the favorable resolution of a contractual matter in the second quarter of 2012 and about $35 million due to decreased risk retirements and production volume; approximately $70 million for the C-130 program due to lower risk retirements and fewer deliveries partially offset by increased sustainment activities; about $65 million for the C-5 program due to the inception-to-date effect of reducing the profit booking rate in the third quarter of 2013 and lower risk retirements; approximately $35 million for the F-16 program due to fewer aircraft deliveries partially offset by increased sustainment activity and aircraft configuration mix. The decreases were partially offset by higher operating profit of approximately $180 million for F-35 production contracts due to increased risk retirements and volume. Operating profit was comparable for the F-35 development contract and included adjustments of approximately $85 million to reflect the inception-to-date impacts of the downward revisions to the profit booking rate in both 2013 and 2012. Adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments and other matters, were approximately $75 million lower for 2013 compared to 2012. 2012 compared to 2011 Aeronautics net sales for 2012 increased $591 million, or 4%, compared to 2011. The increase was attributable to higher net sales of approximately $745 million from F-35 production contracts principally due to increased production volume; about $285 million from F-16 programs primarily due to higher aircraft deliveries (37 F-16 aircraft delivered in 2012 compared to 22 in 2011) partially offset by lower volume on sustainment activities due to the completion of modification programs for certain international customers; and approximately $140 million from C-5 programs due to higher aircraft deliveries (four C-5M aircraft delivered in 2012 compared to two in 2011). Partially offsetting the increases were lower net sales of approximately $365 million from decreased production volume and lower risk retirements on the F-22 program as final aircraft deliveries were completed in the second quarter of 2012; approximately $110 million from the F-35 development contract primarily due to the inception-to-date effect of reducing the profit booking rate in the second quarter of 2012 and to a lesser extent lower volume; and about $95 million from a decrease in volume on other sustainment activities partially offset by various other Aeronautics programs due to higher volume. Net sales for C-130 programs were comparable to 2011 as a decline in sustainment activities largely was offset by increased aircraft deliveries. 36 Table of Contents Aeronautics operating profit for 2012 increased $69 million, or 4%, compared to 2011. The increase was attributable to higher operating profit of approximately $105 million from C-130 programs due to an increase in risk retirements; about $50 million from F-16 programs due to higher aircraft deliveries partially offset by a decline in risk retirements; approximately $50 million from F-35 production contracts due to increased production volume and risk retirements; and about $50 million from the completion of purchased intangible asset amortization on certain F-16 contracts. Partially offsetting the increases was lower operating profit of about $90 million from the F-35 development contract primarily due to the inception-to-date effect of reducing the profit booking rate in the second quarter of 2012; approximately $50 million from decreased production volume and risk retirements on the F-22 program partially offset by a resolution of a contractual matter in the second quarter of 2012; and approximately $45 million primarily due to a decrease in risk retirements on other sustainment activities partially offset by various other Aeronautics programs due to increased risk retirements and volume. Operating profit for C-5 programs was comparable to 2011. Adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments and other matters described above, were approximately $30 million lower for 2012 compared to 2011. Backlog Backlog decreased in 2013 compared to 2012 mainly due to lower orders on F-16, C-5, and C-130 programs, partially offset by higher orders on the F-35 program. Backlog decreased in 2012 compared to 2011 mainly due to lower orders on F-35 and C-130 programs, partially offset by higher orders on F-16 programs. Trends We expect Aeronautics net sales to increase in 2014 in the mid-single digit percentage range as compared to 2013 primarily due to an increase in net sales from F-35 production contracts. Operating profit is expected to increase slightly from 2013, resulting in a slight decrease in operating margins between the years due to program mix. Information Systems & Global Solutions Our IS&GS business segment provides advanced technology systems and expertise, integrated information technology solutions, and management services across a broad spectrum of applications for civil, defense, intelligence, and other government customers. IS&GS has a portfolio of many smaller contracts as compared to our other business segments. IS&GS has been impacted by the continued downturn in federal information technology budgets. IS&GS operating results included the following (in millions): 2013 2012 2011 Net sales $ 8,367 $ 8,846 $ 9,381 Operating profit 759 808 874 Operating margins 9.1 % 9.1 % 9.3% Backlog at year-end 8,300 8,700 9,300 2013 compared to 2012 IS&GS net sales decreased $479 million, or 5%, for 2013 compared to 2012. The decrease was attributable to lower net sales of about $495 million due to decreased volume on various programs (command and control programs for classified customers, NGI, and ERAM programs); and approximately $320 million due to the completion of certain programs (such as Total Information Processing Support Services, the Transportation Worker Identification Credential (TWIC), and ODIN). The decrease was partially offset by higher net sales of about $340 million due to the start-up of certain programs (such as the DISA GSM-O and the National Science Foundation Antarctic Support). IS&GS operating profit decreased $49 million, or 6%, for 2013 compared to 2012. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower operating profit of about $55 million due to certain programs nearing the end of their lifecycles, partially offset by higher operating profit of approximately $15 million due to the start-up of certain programs. Adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments and other matters, were comparable for 2013 compared to 2012. 2012 compared to 2011 IS&GS net sales for 2012 decreased $535 million, or 6%, compared to 2011. The decrease was attributable to lower net sales of approximately $485 million due to the substantial completion of various programs during 2011 (primarily JTRS; ODIN; and U.K. Census); and about $255 million due to lower volume on numerous other programs (primarily Hanford; 37 Table of Contents Warfighter Information Network-Tactical (WIN-T); Command, Control, Battle Management and Communications (C2BMC); and TWIC). Partially offsetting the decreases were higher net sales of approximately $140 million from QTC, which was acquired early in the fourth quarter of 2011; and about $65 million from increased activity on numerous other programs, primarily federal cyber security programs and PTDS operational support. IS&GS operating profit for 2012 decreased $66 million, or 8%, compared to 2011. The decrease was attributable to lower operating profit of approximately $50 million due to the favorable impact of the ODIN contract completion in 2011; about $25 million due to an increase in reserves for performance issues related to an international airborne surveillance system in 2012; and approximately $20 million due to lower volume on certain programs (primarily C2BMC and WIN-T). Partially offsetting the decreases was an increase in operating profit due to higher risk retirements of approximately $15 million from the TWIC program; and about $10 million due to increased activity on numerous other programs, primarily federal cyber security programs and PTDS operational support. Operating profit for the JTRS program was comparable as a decrease in volume was offset by a decrease in reserves. Adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments and other matters described above, were approximately $20 million higher for 2012 compared to 2011. Backlog Backlog decreased in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily due to lower orders on several programs (such as ERAM and NGI), higher sales on certain programs (the National Science Foundation Antarctic Support and the DISA GSM-O), and declining activities on several smaller programs primarily due to the continued downturn in federal information technology budgets. Backlog decreased in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to the substantial completion of various programs in 2011 (primarily ODIN, U.K. Census, and JTRS). Trends We expect IS&GS net sales to decline in 2014 in the high single digit percentage range as compared to 2013 primarily due to the continued downturn in federal information technology budgets. Operating profit is also expected to decline in 2014 in the high single digit percentage range consistent with the expected decline in net sales, resulting in margins that are comparable with 2013 results. Missiles and Fire Control Our MFC business segment provides air and missile defense systems; tactical missiles and air-to-ground precision strike weapon systems; logistics and other technical services; fire control systems; mission operations support, readiness, engineering support, and integration services; and manned and unmanned ground vehicles. MFC major programs include PAC-3, THAAD, Multiple Launch Rocket System, Hellfire, Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile (JASSM), Javelin, Apache Fire Control System (Apache), Sniper , Low Altitude Navigation and Targeting Infrared for Night (LANTIRN ), and SOF CLSS. MFC operating results included the following (in millions): 2013 2012 2011 Net sales $ 7,757 $ 7,457 $ 7,463 Operating profit 1,431 1,256 1,069 Operating margins 18.4 % 16.8 % 14.3 % Backlog at year-end 15,000 14,700 14,400 2013 compared to 2012 MFC net sales for 2013 increased $300 million, or 4%, compared to 2012. The increase was primarily attributable to higher net sales of approximately $450 million for air and missile defense programs (THAAD and PAC-3) due to increased production volume and deliveries; about $70 million for fire control programs due to net increased deliveries and volume; and approximately $55 million for tactical missile programs due to net increased deliveries. The increases were partially offset by lower net sales of about $275 million for various technical services programs due to lower volume driven by the continuing impact of defense budget reductions and related competitive pressures. The increase for fire control programs was primarily attributable to increased deliveries on the Sniper and LANTIRN programs, increased volume on the SOF CLSS program, partially offset by lower volume on Longbow Fire Control Radar and other programs. The increase for tactical missile programs was primarily attributable to increased deliveries on JASSM and other programs, partially offset by fewer deliveries on the Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System and Javelin programs. 38 Table of Contents MFC operating profit for 2013 increased $175 million, or 14%, compared to 2012. The increase was primarily attributable to higher operating profit of approximately $85 million for air and missile defense programs (THAAD and PAC-3) due to increased risk retirements and volume; about $85 million for fire control programs (Sniper , LANTIRN and Apache) due to increased risk retirements and higher volume; and approximately $75 million for tactical missile programs (Hellfire and various programs) due to increased risk retirements. The increases were partially offset by lower operating profit of about $45 million for the resolution of contractual matters in the second quarter of 2012; and approximately $15 million for various technical services programs due to lower volume partially offset by increased risk retirements. Adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments and other matters, were approximately $100 million higher for 2013 compared to 2012. 2012 compared to 2011 MFC net sales for 2012 were comparable to 2011. Net sales decreased approximately $130 million due to lower volume and risk retirements on various services programs, and about $60 million due to lower volume from fire control systems programs (primarily Sniper ; LANTIRN ; and Apache). The decreases largely were offset by higher net sales of approximately $95 million due to higher volume from tactical missile programs (primarily Javelin and Hellfire) and approximately $80 million for air and missile defense programs (primarily PAC-3 and THAAD). MFC operating profit for 2012 increased $187 million, or 17%, compared to 2011. The increase was attributable to higher risk retirements and volume of about $95 million from tactical missile programs (primarily Javelin and Hellfire); increased risk retirements and volume of approximately $60 million for air and missile defense programs (primarily THAAD and PAC-3); and about $45 million from a resolution of contractual matters. Partially offsetting these increases was lower risk retirements and volume on various programs, including $25 million for services programs. Adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments and other matters described above, were approximately $145 million higher for 2012 compared to 2011. Backlog Backlog increased in 2013 compared to 2012 mainly due to higher orders on the THAAD program and lower sales volume compared to new orders on certain fire control systems programs in 2013, partially offset by lower orders on technical services programs and certain tactical missile programs. Backlog increased in 2012 compared to 2011 mainly due to increased orders and lower sales on fire control systems programs (primarily LANTIRN and Sniper ) and on various services programs, partially offset by lower orders and higher sales volume on tactical missiles programs. Trends We expect MFC net sales to be flat to slightly down in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to a decrease in net sales on technical services programs partially offset by an increase in net sales from missiles and fire control programs. Operating profit is expected to decrease in the high single digit percentage range, driven by a reduction in expected risk retirements in 2014. Accordingly, operating profit margin is expected to slightly decline from 2013. Mission Systems and Training Our MST business segment provides ship and submarine mission and combat systems; mission systems and sensors for rotary and fixed-wing aircraft; sea and land-based missile defense systems; radar systems; littoral combat ships; simulation and training services; and unmanned systems and technologies. MST major programs include Aegis Combat System (Aegis), LCS, MH-60, TPQ-53 Radar System, and MK-41 Vertical Launching System (VLS). MST operating results included the following (in millions): 2013 2012 2011 Net sales $ 7,153 $ 7,579 $ 7,132 Operating profit 905 737 645 Operating margins 12.7 % 9.7 % 9.0 % Backlog at year-end 10,800 10,700 10,500 2013 compared to 2012 MST net sales for 2013 decreased $426 million, or 6%, compared to 2012. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower net sales of approximately $275 million for various ship and aviation systems programs due to lower volume 39 Table of Contents (primarily PTDS as final surveillance system deliveries occurred during the second quarter of 2012); about $195 million for various integrated warfare systems and sensors programs (primarily Naval systems) due to lower volume; approximately $65 million for various training and logistics programs due to lower volume; and about $55 million for the Aegis program due to lower volume. The decreases were partially offset by higher net sales of about $155 million for the LCS program due to increased volume. MST operating profit for 2013 increased $168 million, or 23%, compared to 2012. The increase was primarily attributable to higher operating profit of approximately $120 million related to the settlement of contract cost matters on certain programs (including a portion of the terminated presidential helicopter program); about $55 million for integrated warfare systems and sensors programs (primarily radar and Halifax class modernization programs) due to increased risk retirements; and approximately $30 million for undersea systems programs due to increased risk retirements. The increases were partially offset by lower operating profit of about $55 million for training and logistics programs, primarily due to the recording of approximately $30 million of charges mostly related to lower-of-cost-or-market considerations; and about $25 million for ship and aviation systems programs (primarily PTDS) due to lower risk retirements and volume. Operating profit related to the LCS program was comparable. Adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments and other matters, were approximately $170 million higher for 2013 compared to 2012. 2012 compared to 2011 MST net sales for 2012 increased $447 million, or 6%, compared to 2011. The increase in net sales for 2012 was attributable to higher volume and risk retirements of approximately $395 million from ship and aviation system programs (primarily PTDS; LCS; VLS; and MH-60); about $115 million for training and logistics solutions programs primarily due to net sales from Sim-Industries, which was acquired in the fourth quarter of 2011; and approximately $30 million as a result of increased volume on integrated warfare systems and sensors programs (primarily Aegis). Partially offsetting the increases were lower net sales of approximately $70 million from undersea systems programs due to lower volume on an international combat system program and towed array systems; and about $25 million due to lower volume on various other programs. MST operating profit for 2012 increased $92 million, or 14%, compared to 2011. The increase was attributable to higher operating profit of approximately $175 million from ship and aviation system programs, which reflects higher volume and risk retirements on certain programs (primarily VLS; PTDS; MH-60; and LCS) and reserves of about $55 million for contract cost matters on ship and aviation system programs recorded in the fourth quarter of 2011 (including the terminated presidential helicopter program). Partially offsetting the increase was lower operating profit of approximately $40 million from undersea systems programs due to reduced profit booking rates on certain programs and lower volume on an international combat system program and towed array systems; and about $40 million due to lower volume on various other programs. Adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments and other matters described above, were approximately $150 million higher for 2012 compared to 2011. Backlog Backlog increased slightly in 2013 compared to 2012 mainly due to higher orders and lower sales on integrated warfare system and sensors programs (primarily Aegis) and lower sales on various service programs, partially offset by lower orders on ship and aviation systems (primarily MH-60). Backlog increased in 2012 compared to 2011 mainly due to increased orders on ship and aviation system programs (primarily MH-60 and LCS), partially offset by decreased orders and higher sales volume on integrated warfare systems and sensors programs (primarily Aegis). Trends We expect MST net sales to be flat in 2014 compared to 2013. Operating profit is expected to decrease in the low double digit percentage range from 2013 primarily due to the absence of favorable contractual resolutions that occurred in 2013 as described above and expected charges, net of recoveries, in 2014 for incremental costs related to the November 2013 restructuring plan as described in the Consolidated Results of Operations section above, resulting in a decline in operating margins between the years. Space Systems Our Space Systems business segment is engaged in the research and development, design, engineering, and production of satellites, strategic and defensive missile systems, and space transportation systems. Space Systems is also responsible for various classified systems and services in support of vital national security systems. Space Systems major programs include the Trident II D5 Fleet Ballistic Missile (FBM), Space Based Infrared System (SBIRS), Advanced Extremely High 40 Table of Contents Frequency (AEHF) system, Orion, Global Positioning Satellite (GPS) III system, Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite R-Series (GOES-R), and Mobile User Objective System (MUOS). Operating profit for our Space Systems business segment includes our share of earnings for our investment in United Launch Alliance (ULA), which provides expendable launch services to the U.S. Government. Space Systems operating results included the following (in millions): 2013 2012 2011 Net sales $ 7,958 $ 8,347 $ 8,161 Operating profit 1,045 1,083 1,063 Operating margins 13.1 % 13.0 % 13.0 % Backlog at year-end 20,500 18,100 16,000 2013 compared to 2012 Space Systems net sales for 2013 decreased $389 million, or 5%, compared to 2012. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower net sales of approximately $305 million for commercial satellite programs due to fewer deliveries (zero delivered during 2013 compared to two for 2012); and about $290 million for the Orion program due to lower volume. The decreases were partially offset by higher net sales of approximately $130 million for government satellite programs due to net increased volume; and about $65 million for strategic and defensive missile programs (primarily FBM) due to increased volume and risk retirements. The increase for government satellite programs was primarily attributable to higher volume on AEHF and other programs, partially offset by lower volume on GOES-R, MUOS, and SBIRS programs. Space Systems operating profit for 2013 decreased $38 million, or 4%, compared to 2012. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower operating profit of approximately $50 million for the Orion program due to lower volume and risk retirements and about $30 million for government satellite programs due to decreased risk retirements, which were partially offset by higher equity earnings from joint ventures of approximately $35 million. The decrease in operating profit for government satellite programs was primarily attributable to lower risk retirements for MUOS, GPS III, and other programs, partially offset by higher risk retirements for the SBIRS and AEHF programs. Operating profit for 2013 included about $15 million of charges, net of recoveries, related to the November 2013 restructuring plan. Adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments and other matters, were approximately $15 million lower for 2013 compared to 2012. 2012 compared to 2011 Space Systems net sales for 2012 increased $186 million, or 2%, compared to 2011. The increase was attributable to higher net sales of approximately $150 million due to increased commercial satellite deliveries (two commercial satellites delivered in 2012 compared to one during 2011); about $125 million from the Orion program due to higher volume and an increase in risk retirements; and approximately $70 million from increased volume on various strategic and defensive missile programs. Partially offsetting the increases were lower net sales of approximately $105 million from certain government satellite programs (primarily SBIRS and MUOS) as a result of decreased volume and a decline in risk retirements; and about $55 million from the NASA External Tank program, which ended in connection with the completion of the Space Shuttle program in 2011. Space Systems operating profit for 2012 increased $20 million, or 2%, compared to 2011. The increase was attributable to higher operating profit of approximately $60 million from commercial satellite programs due to increased deliveries and reserves recorded in 2011; and about $40 million from the Orion program due to higher risk retirements and increased volume. Partially offsetting the increases was lower operating profit of approximately $45 million from lower volume and risk retirements on certain government satellite programs (primarily SBIRS); about $20 million from lower risk retirements and lower volume on the NASA External Tank program, which ended in connection with the completion of the Space Shuttle program in 2011; and approximately $20 million from lower equity earnings as a decline in launch related activities at ULA partially was offset by the resolution of contract cost matters associated with the wind-down of United Space Alliance (USA). Adjustments not related to volume, including net profit booking rate adjustments described above, were approximately $15 million higher for 2012 compared to 2011. Equity earnings Total equity earnings recognized by Space Systems (primarily ULA in 2013) represented approximately $300 million, or 29% of this segment operating profit during 2013. During 2012 and 2011, total equity earnings recognized by Space Systems from ULA, USA, and the U.K. Atomic Weapons Establishment joint venture represented approximately $265 million and $285 million, or 24% and 27% of this segment operating profit. 41 Table of Contents Backlog Backlog increased in 2013 compared to 2012 mainly due to higher orders on the Orion program, partially offset by lower orders on government satellite programs (primarily AEHF). Backlog increased in 2012 compared to 2011 mainly due to higher orders on government satellites activities, partially offset by lower orders on the Orion program. Trends We expect Space Systems net sales to decline in 2014 in the mid-single digit percentage range as compared to 2013 primarily due to a decrease in volume on satellite programs in 2014. Operating profit is expected to decline in the low double digit percentage range in 2014 primarily due to lower earnings on satellite programs, expected charges, net of recoveries, in 2014 for accelerated depreciation expense and incremental costs related to the November 2013 restructuring plan as described in the Consolidated Results of Operations section above, and lower equity earnings. As a result, operating margins are expected to decline between the years. Liquidity and Cash Flows We have a balanced cash deployment strategy to enhance stockholder value and position ourselves to take advantage of new business opportunities when they arise. Consistent with that strategy, we have invested in our business, including capital expenditures and independent research and development, returned cash to stockholders through dividends and share repurchases, made selective acquisitions of businesses, and managed our debt levels. We have generated strong operating cash flows, which have been the primary source of funding for our operations, debt service and repayments, capital expenditures, dividends, share repurchases, acquisitions, and postretirement benefit plan funding. We have accessed the capital markets on limited occasions, as needed or when opportunistic. Our cash balances and cash from operations have historically been sufficient to support our operations and anticipated capital expenditures for the foreseeable future. However, our liquidity and cash flows could be materially impacted in the future if the U.S. Government were to shut down due to impasses over budget and/or debt ceiling negotiations. As discussed in the Capital Resources section, we have financing resources available to fund potential cash outflows that are less predictable or more discretionary, should they occur. We also have access to the credit markets, if needed, for liquidity or general corporate purposes, including, but not limited to, our revolving credit facility or the ability to issue commercial paper and letters of credit to support customer advance payments and for other trade finance purposes such as guaranteeing our performance on particular contracts. Cash received from customers, either from the payment of invoices for work performed or for advances in excess of costs incurred, is our primary source of cash. We generally do not begin work on contracts until funding is appropriated by the customer. Billing timetables and payment terms on our contracts vary based on a number of factors, including the contract type. We generally bill and collect cash more frequently under cost-reimbursable and time-and-materials contracts, which together represent approximately half of the sales we recorded in 2013, as we are authorized to bill as the costs are incurred or work is performed. A number of our fixed-price contracts may provide for performance-based payments, which allow us to bill and collect cash as we perform on the contract. The amount of performance-based payments and the related milestones are encompassed in the negotiation of each contract. The timing of such payments may differ from our incurrence of costs related to our contract performance, thereby affecting our cash flows. The U.S. Government has indicated that it would consider progress payments as the baseline for negotiating payment terms on fixed-price contracts, rather than performance-based payments. In contrast to negotiated performance-based payment terms, progress payment provisions correspond to a percentage of the amount of costs incurred during the performance of the contract. While the total amount of cash collected on a contract is the same, performance-based payments have had a more favorable impact on the timing of our cash flows. In addition, our cash flows may be affected if the U.S. Government decides to withhold payments on our billings. The amount of withholds was approximately $200 million as of December 31, 2012. We collected substantially all of this amount in 2013 as we resolved certain deficiencies related to U.S. Government audits of our business systems, primarily at our Aeronautics business segment. While the impact of withholding payments delays the receipt of cash, the cumulative amount of cash collected during the life of the contract will not vary. The majority of our capital expenditures for 2013 and those planned for 2014 can be divided into the categories of facilities infrastructure, equipment, and information technology. Expenditures for facilities infrastructure and equipment are generally incurred to support new and existing programs across all of our business segments. For example, we have projects underway in our Aeronautics business segment for facilities and equipment to support production of the F-35 combat aircraft. 42 Table of Contents In addition, we have projects underway to modernize certain of our facilities, inclusive of our efforts to consolidate and reduce leased facilities. We also incur capital expenditures for information technology to support programs and general enterprise information technology infrastructure, inclusive of costs for development or purchase of internal-use software. The following table provides a summary of our cash flow information followed by a discussion of the key elements (in millions): 2013 2012 2011 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period $ 1,898 $ 3,582 $ 2,261 Operating activities Net earnings 2,981 2,745 2,655 Non-cash adjustments 1,570 2,133 1,210 Changes in working capital (98 ) (1,061 ) 674 Other, net 93 (2,256 ) (286) Net cash provided by operating activities 4,546 1,561 4,253 Net cash used for investing activities (1,121 ) (1,177 ) (788) Net cash used for financing activities (2,706 ) (2,068 ) (2,144) Net change in cash and cash equivalents 719 (1,684 ) 1,321 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year $ 2,617 $ 1,898 $ 3,582 Operating Activities 2013 compared to 2012 Net cash provided by operating activities increased $3.0 billion in 2013 as compared to 2012 primarily due to lower pension contributions, a lower increase in working capital, a tax refund in 2013 as discussed below, and improved operating results. We made $2.25 billion in contributions to our qualified defined benefit pension plans during 2013, compared to $3.6 billion during 2012. The $1.0 billion decline in the growth of working capital (defined as receivables, net and inventories, net less accounts payable and customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred) was attributable to higher cash receipts related to accounts receivable, primarily on F-35 production contracts (including amounts from resolving U.S. Government contractual withholds). Partially offsetting the improved accounts receivable collections were higher payments to suppliers, primarily on F-35 production contracts. In addition, there was lower growth in inventories in 2013 as compared to 2012 primarily due to the timing of advance payments applied to inventory. We made tax payments, net of refunds received, of $787 million during 2013, compared to $890 million during 2012. We expect our 2014 net tax payments will increase over our 2013 tax payments, which were reduced by a $550 million refund from the IRS primarily attributable to our tax-deductible discretionary pension contributions during the fourth quarter of 2012. 2012 compared to 2011 Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $2.7 billion in 2012 as compared to 2011 primarily due to changes in working capital of $1.7 billion and increased pension contributions of $1.1 billion, net of CAS recoveries. The decrease of $1.7 billion in cash provided by working capital (defined as accounts receivable and inventories less accounts payable and customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred) was driven by higher payments of accounts payable due to timing as well as the timing of production and billing cycles affecting customer advances and progress payments applied to inventories. Additionally, growth in accounts receivable, primarily due to the timing of finalizing contract negotiations on F-35 production contracts in the fourth quarter of 2012, which delayed our billings, as well as the impact of U.S. Government withholdings on the F-35 program reduced the cash provided by operating activities. Investing Activities Capital expenditures Capital expenditures amounted to $836 million in 2013, $942 million in 2012, and $987 million in 2011. Acquisitions and other activities Acquisition activities include both the acquisition of businesses and investments in affiliates. We paid $269 million in 2013 for acquisition activities, primarily related to the acquisition of Amor Group (Note 14). In 2012, we paid $259 million for acquisition activities, primarily related to the acquisitions of Chandler/May, CDL, and 43 Table of Contents Procerus (Note 14). In 2011, we paid $624 million for acquisition activities, primarily related to the acquisitions of QTC and Sim-Industries (Note 14). In 2011, we received cash of $510 million from the maturity of short-term investments. Financing Activities Dividends and share activity We paid dividends totaling $1.5 billion ($4.78 per share) in 2013, $1.4 billion ($4.15 per share) in 2012, and $1.1 billion ($3.25 per share) in 2011. We have increased our quarterly dividend rate in each of the last three years, including a 16% increase in the quarterly dividend rate in the fourth quarter of 2013. We declared quarterly dividends of $1.15 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2013 and $1.33 per share for the last quarter; $1.00 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2012 and $1.15 per share for the last quarter; and $.75 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2011 and $1.00 per share for the last quarter. We paid $1.8 billion, $1.0 billion, and $2.5 billion for repurchases of our common stock during 2013, 2012, and 2011. In September 2013, our Board of Directors approved a $3.0 billion increase to our share repurchase program. We had total remaining authorization of $3.6 billion for future common share repurchases under our program as of December 31, 2013. Cash received from the issuance of our common stock in connection with employee stock option exercises during 2013, 2012, and 2011 totaled $827 million, $440 million, and $116 million. Those exercises resulted in the issuance of 10.0 million shares, 6.7 million shares, and 2.3 million shares of our common stock during the respective periods. Long-term debt In 2013, we repaid $150 million of long-term notes with a fixed interest rate of 7.38% due to their scheduled maturities. In 2012, we paid $225 million to complete an exchange of debt (Note 9) to take advantage of the low interest rate environment. In 2011, we issued a total of $2.0 billion of long-term notes with fixed coupon rates ranging from 2.13% to 4.85%. We used a portion of the proceeds from the long-term notes that were issued in 2011 to redeem all of our $500 million long-term notes due in 2013 with a fixed coupon rate of 4.12%. In 2011, we also repurchased $84 million of our long-term notes through open-market purchases and paid premiums of $48 million in connection with the early extinguishments of certain long-term notes. Capital Structure, Resources, and Other At December 31, 2013, we held cash and cash equivalents of $2.6 billion. As of December 31, 2013, approximately $450 million of our cash and cash equivalents was held outside of the U.S. by foreign subsidiaries. Although those balances are generally available to fund ordinary business operations without legal or other restrictions, a significant portion is not immediately available to fund U.S. operations unless repatriated. Our intention is to permanently reinvest earnings from our foreign subsidiaries. While we do not intend to do so, if this cash was repatriated at the end of 2013, we estimate that about $50 million of U.S. federal income tax would have been due after considering foreign tax credits. Our outstanding debt, net of unamortized discounts, amounted to $6.2 billion, and mainly is in the form of publicly-issued notes that bear interest at fixed rates. As of December 31, 2013, we were in compliance with all covenants contained in our debt and credit agreements. At December 31, 2013 and 2012, we had in place with a group of banks a $1.5 billion revolving credit facility that expires in August 2016. We may request and the banks may grant, at their discretion, an increase to the credit facility by an additional amount up to $500 million. There were no borrowings outstanding under the credit facility through December 31, 2013. Borrowings under the credit facility would be unsecured and bear interest at rates based, at our option, on a Eurodollar rate or a Base Rate, as defined in the credit facility. Each bank obligation to make loans under the credit facility is subject to, among other things, our compliance with various representations, warranties and covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and certain of our subsidiaries ability to encumber assets and a covenant not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio, as defined in the credit facility. The leverage ratio covenant excludes the adjustments recognized in stockholders equity related to postretirement benefit plans. As of December 31, 2013, we were in compliance with all covenants contained in the credit facility, as well as in our debt agreements. We have agreements in place with financial institutions to provide for the issuance of commercial paper. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2013. If we were to issue commercial paper, the borrowings would be supported by the credit facility. We also have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 on file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission through August 2014 to provide for the issuance of an indeterminate amount of debt securities. We actively seek to finance our business in a manner that preserves financial flexibility while minimizing borrowing costs to the extent practicable. We review changes in financial market and economic conditions to manage the types, 44 Table of Contents amounts, and maturities of our indebtedness. We may at times refinance existing indebtedness, vary our mix of variable-rate and fixed-rate debt, or seek alternative financing sources for our cash and operational needs. Our stockholders equity increased from $39 million at December 31, 2012 to $4.9 billion at December 31, 2013. The increase was due to the annual December 31 measurement adjustment related to our postretirement benefit plans of $2.9 billion, primarily due to an increase in the discount rate, and the amortization of net actuarial gains and losses of $1.0 billion in 2013; net earnings of $3.0 billion; and employee stock activity of $1.3 billion. These increases partially were offset by dividends declared of $1.6 billion during the year and the repurchase of 16.0 million common shares for $1.7 billion. As we repurchase our common shares, we reduce common stock for the $1 of par value of the shares repurchased, with the excess purchase price over par value recorded as a reduction of additional paid-in capital. Due to the volume of repurchases made under our share repurchase program, additional paid-in capital was reduced to zero, with the remainder of the excess purchase price over par value of $434 million recorded as a reduction of retained earnings. Contractual Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements At December 31, 2013, we had contractual commitments to repay debt, make payments under operating leases, settle obligations related to agreements to purchase goods and services, and settle tax and other liabilities. Capital lease obligations were not material. Payments due under these obligations and commitments are as follows (in millions): Payments Due By Period Total Less Than 1 Year Years 2 and 3 Years 4 and 5 After 5 Years Long-term debt (a) $ 6,933 $ $ 952 $ $ 5,981 Interest payments 5,873 347 677 601 4,248 Other liabilities 2,656 248 443 377 1,588 Operating lease obligations 914 227 298 165 224 Purchase obligations: Operating activities 28,208 13,838 10,505 3,162 703 Capital expenditures 197 107 88 2 Total contractual cash obligations $ 44,781 $ 14,767 $ 12,963 $ 4,307 $ 12,744 (a) Long-term debt includes scheduled principal payments only. Amounts related to other liabilities represent the contractual obligations for certain long-term liabilities recorded as of December 31, 2013. Such amounts mainly include expected payments under non-qualified pension plans, environmental liabilities, and deferred compensation plans. Purchase obligations related to operating activities include agreements and contracts that give the supplier recourse to us for cancellation or nonperformance under the contract or contain terms that would subject us to liquidated damages. Such agreements and contracts may, for example, be related to direct materials, obligations to subcontractors, and outsourcing arrangements. Total purchase obligations for operating activities in the preceding table include approximately $26.4 billion related to contractual commitments entered into as a result of contracts we have with our U.S. Government customers. The U.S. Government generally would be required to pay us for any costs we incur relative to these commitments if they were to terminate the related contracts for convenience under the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR), subject to available funding. This also would be true in cases where we perform subcontract work for a prime contractor under a U.S. Government contract. The termination for convenience language also may be included in contracts with foreign, state, and local governments. We also have contracts with customers that do not include termination for convenience provisions, including contracts with commercial customers. Purchase obligations in the preceding table for capital expenditures generally include amounts for facilities and equipment related to customer contracts. We also may enter into industrial cooperation agreements, sometimes referred to as offset agreements, as a condition to obtaining orders for our products and services from certain customers in foreign countries. These agreements are designed to enhance the social and economic environment of the foreign country by requiring the contractor to promote investment in the country. Offset agreements may be satisfied through activities that do not require us to use cash, including transferring technology, providing manufacturing and other consulting support to in-country projects, and the purchase by third parties (e.g. , our vendors) of supplies from in-country vendors. These agreements also may be satisfied through our use of cash for such activities as purchasing supplies from in-country vendors, providing financial support for in-country projects, establishment of ventures with local companies, and building or leasing facilities for in-country operations. We typically do 45 Table of Contents not commit to offset agreements until orders for our products or services are definitive. The amounts ultimately applied against our offset agreements are based on negotiations with the customer and typically require cash outlays that represent only a fraction of the original amount in the offset agreement. At December 31, 2013, the remaining obligations under our outstanding offset agreements totaled $9.9 billion, which primarily relate to our Aeronautics, MFC, and MST business segments, some of which extend through 2027. To the extent we have entered into purchase obligations at December 31, 2013 that also satisfy offset agreements, those amounts are included in the preceding table. Offset programs usually extend over several years and may provide for penalties, estimated at approximately $1.0 billion at December 31, 2013, in the event we fail to perform in accordance with offset requirements. While historically we have not been required to pay material penalties, resolution of offset requirements are often the result of negotiations and subjective judgments. In connection with our 50% ownership interest of ULA, we and The Boeing Company (Boeing) have each received distributions totaling $527 million (since ULA formation in December 2006) which are subject to agreements between us, Boeing, and ULA, whereby, if ULA does not have sufficient cash resources or credit capacity to make required payments under the inventory supply agreement it has with Boeing, both we and Boeing would provide to ULA, in the form of an additional capital contribution, the level of funding required for ULA to make those payments. Any such capital contributions would not exceed the amount of the distributions subject to the agreements. Based on current expectations of ULA cash flow needs, we currently believe that ULA should have sufficient operating cash flows and credit capacity, including access to its $560 million revolving credit agreement from third-party financial institutions, to meet its obligations such that we would not be required to make a contribution under these agreements. In addition, both we and Boeing have cross-indemnified each other for guarantees by us and Boeing of the performance and financial obligations of ULA under certain launch service contracts. We believe ULA will be able to fully perform its obligations, as it has done through December 31, 2013, and that it will not be necessary to make payments under the cross-indemnities or guarantees. We have entered into standby letters of credit, surety bonds, and third-party guarantees with financial institutions and other third parties primarily relating to advances received from customers and the guarantee of future performance on certain contracts. Letters of credit and surety bonds generally are available for draw down in the event we do not perform. In some cases, we may guarantee the contractual performance of third parties such as venture partners. At December 31, 2013, we had the following outstanding letters of credit, surety bonds, and third-party guarantees (in millions): Commitment Expiration By Period Total Commitment Less Than 1 Year Years 2 and 3 Years 4 and 5 After 5 Years Standby letters of credit (a) $1,313 $ 964 $231 $101 $ 17 Surety bonds 358 358 Guarantees 696 6 192 498 Total commitments $2,367 $1,328 $423 $101 $515 (a) Approximately $760 million of standby letters of credit in the Less Than 1 Year category are expected to renew for additional periods until completion of the contractual obligation. At December 31, 2013, third-party guarantees totaled $696 million, of which approximately 90% related to guarantees of contractual performance of ventures to which we currently are or previously were a party. This amount represents our estimate of the maximum amount we would expect to incur upon the contractual non-performance of the venture partners. In addition, we generally have cross-indemnities in place that may enable us to recover amounts that may be paid on behalf of a venture partner. We believe our current and former venture partners will be able to perform their obligations, as they have done through December 31, 2013, and that it will not be necessary to make payments under the guarantees. In determining our exposures, we evaluate the reputation, technical capabilities, and credit quality of our current and former venture partners. Critical Accounting Policies Contract Accounting / Sales Recognition Substantially all of our net sales are accounted for using the percentage-of-completion method, which requires that significant estimates and assumptions be made in accounting for the contracts. Our remaining net sales are derived from contracts to provide services to non-U.S. Government customers, which we account for under the services accounting model. 46 Table of Contents We evaluate new or significantly modified contracts with customers other than the U.S. Government, to the extent the contracts include multiple elements, to determine if the individual deliverables should be accounted for as separate units of accounting. When we determine that accounting for the deliverables as separate units is appropriate, we allocate the contract value to the deliverables based on their relative estimated selling prices. The contracts or contract modifications we evaluate for multiple elements typically are long-term in nature and include the provision of both products and services. Based on the nature of our business, we generally account for components of such contracts using the percentage-of-completion accounting model or the services accounting model, as appropriate. We classify net sales as products or services on our Statements of Earnings based on the predominant attributes of the underlying contract. Most of our long-term contracts are denominated in U.S. dollars, including contracts for sales of military products and services to international governments contracted through the U.S. Government. We record sales for both products and services under cost-reimbursable, fixed-price, and time-and-materials contracts. Contract Types Cost-reimbursable contracts Cost-reimbursable contracts, which accounted for about 45% of our total net sales in 2013 and 2012 and 50% of our total net sales in 2011, provide for the payment of allowable costs incurred during performance of the contract plus a fee, up to a ceiling based on the amount that has been funded. We generate revenue under two general types of cost-reimbursable contracts: cost-plus-award-fee/incentive fee which represent a substantial majority of our cost-reimbursable contracts; and cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts. Cost-plus-award-fee contracts provide for an award fee that varies within specified limits based on the customer assessment of our performance against a predetermined set of criteria, such as targets based on cost, quality, technical, and schedule criteria. Cost-plus-incentive-fee contracts provide for reimbursement of costs plus a fee which is adjusted by a formula based on the relationship of total allowable costs to total target costs (incentive based on cost) or reimbursement of costs plus an incentive to exceed stated performance targets (incentive based on performance). The fixed fee in a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract is negotiated at the inception of the contract and that fixed fee does not vary with actual costs. Fixed-price and other contracts Under fixed-price contracts, which accounted for about 50% of our total net sales in 2013 and 2012 and 45% of our total net sales in 2011, we agree to perform the specified work for a pre-determined price. To the extent our actual costs vary from the estimates upon which the price was negotiated, we will generate more or less profit, or could incur a loss. Some fixed-price contracts have a performance-based component under which we may earn incentive payments or incur financial penalties based on our performance. Under time-and-materials contracts, which accounted for about 5% of our total net sales in 2013, 2012, and 2011, we are paid a fixed hourly rate for each direct labor hour expended, and we are reimbursed for allowable material costs and allowable out-of-pocket expenses. To the extent our actual direct labor and associated costs vary in relation to the fixed hourly billing rates provided in the contract, we will generate more or less profit, or could incur a loss. Percentage-of-Completion Method of Accounting We record net sales and an estimated profit on a percentage-of-completion basis for cost-reimbursable and fixed-price contracts for product and services contracts with the U.S. Government. The percentage-of-completion method for product contracts depends on the nature of the products provided under the contract. For example, for contracts that require us to perform a significant level of development effort in comparison to the total value of the contract and/or to deliver minimal quantities, sales are recorded using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress toward completion. Under the cost-to-cost method of accounting, we recognize sales and an estimated profit as costs are incurred based on the proportion that the incurred costs bear to total estimated costs. For contracts that require us to provide a substantial number of similar items without a significant level of development, we record sales and an estimated profit on a percentage-of-completion basis using units-of-delivery as the basis to measure progress toward completing the contract. For contracts to provide services to the U.S. Government, sales are generally recorded using the cost-to-cost method. 47 Table of Contents Award and incentive fees, as well as penalties related to contract performance, are considered in estimating sales and profit rates on contracts accounted for under the percentage-of-completion method. Estimates of award fees are based on past experience and anticipated performance. We record incentives or penalties when there is sufficient information to assess anticipated contract performance. Incentive provisions that increase or decrease earnings based solely on a single significant event are not recognized until the event occurs. Accounting for contracts using the percentage-of-completion method requires judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract sales and costs (including estimating award and incentive fees and penalties related to performance), and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. Due to the number of years it may take to complete many of our contracts and the scope and nature of the work required to be performed on those contracts, the estimation of total sales and costs at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. Contract costs include material, labor, and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs. Our estimates of costs at completion of the contract are based on assumptions we make for variables such as labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the availability of materials, the length of time to complete the contract (to estimate increases in wages and prices for materials), performance by our subcontractors, and the availability and timing of funding from our customer, among other variables. When estimates of total costs to be incurred on a contract exceed total estimates of sales to be earned, a provision for the entire loss on the contract is recorded in the period in which the loss is determined. Many of our contracts span several years and include highly complex technical requirements. At the outset of a contract, we identify and monitor risks to the achievement of the technical, schedule, and cost aspects of the contract, and assess the effects of those risks on our estimates of total costs to complete the contract. The estimates consider the technical requirements (e.g., a newly-developed product versus a mature product), the schedule and associated tasks (e.g., the number and type of milestone events), and costs (e.g., material, labor, subcontractor and overhead). The initial profit booking rate of each contract considers risks surrounding the ability to achieve the technical requirements, schedule, and costs in the initial estimated costs at completion. Profit booking rates may increase during the performance of the contract if we successfully retire risks surrounding the technical, schedule and cost aspects of the contract. Conversely, our profit booking rates may decrease if the estimated costs to complete the contract increase. All of the estimates are subject to change during the performance of the contract and may affect the profit booking rate. In addition, comparability of our sales, segment operating profit, and segment operating margins may be impacted by changes in profit booking rates on our contracts accounted for using the percentage-of-completion method of accounting. Increases in the profit booking rates, typically referred to as risk retirements, usually relate to revisions in the total estimated costs at completion that reflect improved conditions on a particular contract. Conversely, conditions on a particular contract may deteriorate resulting in an increase in the estimated costs at completion and a reduction of the profit booking rate. Increases or decreases in profit booking rates are recognized in the current period and reflect the inception-to-date effect of such changes. Segment operating profit and segment operating margins may also be impacted, favorably or unfavorably, by other matters such as the resolution of contractual matters; restructuring charges, except for significant severance actions as mentioned above; cost recoveries on all restructuring charges; reserves for disputes; asset impairments; and insurance recoveries; among others. Segment operating profit and items such as risk retirements, reductions of profit booking rates, or other matters are presented net of state income taxes. Services Method of Accounting Under a fixed-price service contract, we are paid a predetermined fixed amount for a specified scope of work and generally have full responsibility for the costs associated with the contract and the resulting profit or loss. We record net sales under fixed-price service contracts to non-U.S. Government customers on a straight-line basis over the period of contract performance, unless evidence suggests that net sales are earned or the obligations are fulfilled in a different pattern. For cost-reimbursable contracts for services to non-U.S. Government customers that provide for award and incentive fees, we record net sales as services are performed, exclusive of award and incentive fees. Award and incentive fees are recorded when they are fixed or determinable, generally at the date the amount is communicated to us by the customer. This approach results in the recognition of such fees at contractual intervals (typically every six months) throughout the contract and is dependent on the customer processes for notification of awards and issuance of formal notifications. Costs for all service contracts are expensed as incurred. 48 Table of Contents Other Contract Accounting Considerations The majority of our sales are driven by pricing based on costs incurred to produce products or perform services under contracts with the U.S. Government. Cost-based pricing is determined under the FAR. The FAR provides guidance on the types of costs that are allowable in establishing prices for goods and services under U.S. Government contracts. For example, costs such as those related to charitable contributions, interest expense, and certain advertising and public relations activities are unallowable and, therefore, not recoverable through sales. In addition, we may enter into advance agreements with the U.S. Government that address the subjects of allowability and allocability of costs to contracts for specific matters. For example, most of the environmental costs we incur for environmental remediation related to sites operated in prior years are allocated to our current operations as general and administrative costs under FAR provisions and supporting advance agreements reached with the U.S. Government. We closely monitor compliance with, and the consistent application of, our critical accounting policies related to contract accounting. Costs incurred and allocated to contracts are reviewed for compliance with U.S. Government regulations by our personnel, and are subject to audit by the Defense Contract Audit Agency. Postretirement Benefit Plans Overview Many of our employees are covered by defined benefit pension plans, and we provide certain health care and life insurance benefits to eligible retirees (collectively, postretirement benefit plans see Note 10). In recent years, we have taken certain actions to mitigate the effect of our defined benefit pension plans on our financial results, including no longer offering a defined benefit pension plan to non-union represented employees hired after December 2005. Over the last few years, we have negotiated similar changes with various labor organizations such that new union represented employees do not participate in our defined benefit pension plans. We have also made substantial cash contributions over the years to our defined benefit pension plans including $2.25 billion in 2013, $3.6 billion in 2012, and $2.3 billion in 2011. Notwithstanding these actions, the impact of these plans and benefits on our earnings may be volatile in that the amount of expense we record and the funded status for our postretirement benefit plans may materially change from year to year because those calculations are sensitive to funding levels as well as changes in several key economic assumptions, including interest rates, rates of return on plan assets, and other actuarial assumptions including participant mortality estimates, expected rates of increase in future compensation levels, and employee turnover, as well as the timing of cash funding. We recognize on a plan-by-plan basis the funded status of our postretirement benefit plans under GAAP as either an asset or a liability on our Balance Sheets. There is a corresponding non-cash adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax benefits recorded as deferred tax assets, in stockholders equity. The GAAP funded status is measured as the difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the benefit obligation of the plan. The GAAP benefit obligation represents the present value of the future benefits to be paid to plan participants based on past service. The present value is calculated using a discount rate that is determined at the end of each year. Historically low interest rates over the last few years have significantly increased our benefit obligation. This has contributed to a lower funded status of our defined benefit pension plans as determined by GAAP but has been partially mitigated by a rise in interest rates during 2013. The funding of our pension plans is determined in accordance with the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), as amended by the Pension Protection Act of 2006 (PPA). Our goal has been to fund the pension plans to a level of at least 80%, as determined by the PPA. This ERISA funded status is calculated on a different basis than under GAAP. The ERISA liability does not reflect anticipated future pay increases for plan participants as required under GAAP and is currently measured using a higher discount rate than for GAAP, primarily due to The Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act of 2012 (MAP-21) which provides temporary funding relief due to the historically low interest rate environment. By way of contrast, under ERISA our plans are about 90% funded at December 31, 2013 and 2012, while for GAAP our defined benefit pension plans are about 78% and 67% funded at December 31, 2013 and 2012. CAS govern the extent to which our pension costs are allocable to and recoverable under contracts with the U.S. Government, including FMS. Actuarial Assumptions GAAP requires that the amounts we record related to our plans be computed using actuarial valuations. The primary year-end assumptions used to determine the funded status and estimate postretirement benefit plan expense for the following calendar year are the discount rate, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, employee turnover, and participant mortality estimates for all postretirement benefit plans; the expected rates of increase in future compensation levels for the 49 Table of Contents participants in our defined benefit pension plans; and the health care cost trend rates for our retiree medical plans. The assumptions we make impact both the calculation of the benefit obligation at the end of the year and the calculation of net postretirement benefit plan cost in the subsequent year. The difference between the long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption we select and the actual return on plan assets in any given year affects both the funded status of our benefit plans and the calculation of net postretirement benefit plan cost in subsequent years. When reassessing these assumptions each year we consider past and current market conditions and make judgments about future market trends. We also have to consider factors such as the timing and amounts of expected contributions to the plans and benefit payments to plan participants. We determined that 4.75% was an appropriate discount rate for calculating our benefit obligations at December 31, 2013 related to our defined benefit pension plans, compared to 4.00% at the end of 2012 and 4.75% at the end of 2011. We selected 4.50% as the discount rate for calculating our benefit obligations at December 31, 2013 related to our retiree medical plans, compared to 3.75% at the end of 2012 and 4.50% at the end of 2011. We evaluate several data points in order to arrive at an appropriate discount rate, including results from cash flow models, quoted rates from long-term bond indices, and changes in long-term bond rates over the past year. As part of our evaluation, we calculate the approximate average yields on corporate bonds rated AA or better that were selected to match our projected postretirement benefit plan cash flows. We determined that 8.00% was a reasonable estimate for the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption at December 31, 2013, consistent with the rate used at December 31, 2012 and 2011. The long-term rate of return assumption represents the expected average rate of earnings on the funds invested, or to be invested, to provide for the benefits included in the plan obligation. This assumption is based on several factors including historical market index returns, the anticipated long-term allocation of plan assets, the historical return data for the trust funds, plan expenses, and the potential to outperform market index returns. The actual return in any specific year likely will differ from the assumption, but the average expected return over a long-term future horizon should be approximately equal to the assumption. As a result, changes in this assumption are less frequent than changes in the discount rate. Our stockholders equity has been reduced cumulatively by $9.6 billion from the annual year-end measurements of the funded status of postretirement benefit plans, net of the December 31, 2013 measurement which increased equity by $2.9 billion primarily as a result of the increase in the discount rate for calculating our benefit obligations. The cumulative non-cash, after-tax reduction primarily represents net actuarial losses resulting from declines in discount rates from 6.375% at the end of 2007 to 4.75% at the end of 2013 and investment losses incurred during 2008, which will be amortized to expense over the average future service period of employees expected to receive benefits under the plans of approximately 10 years. During 2013, $1.0 billion of these amounts was recognized as a component of postretirement benefit plans expense and $700 million is expected to be recognized as expense in 2014. The discount rate and long-term rate of return on plan assets assumptions we select at the end of each year are based on our best estimates and judgment. A change of plus or minus 25 basis points in the 4.75% discount rate assumption at December 31, 2013, with all other assumptions held constant, would have decreased or increased the amount of the qualified pension benefit obligation we recorded at the end of 2013 by approximately $1.5 billion, which would result in an after-tax increase or decrease in stockholders equity at the end of the year of approximately $1.0 billion. If the 4.75% discount rate at December 31, 2013 that was used to compute the expected 2014 expense for our qualified defined benefit pension plans had been 25 basis points higher or lower, with all other assumptions held constant, the amount of expense projected for 2014 would be lower or higher by approximately $130 million. If the 8.00% expected long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption at December 31, 2013 that was used to compute the expected 2014 expense for our qualified defined benefit pension plans had been 25 basis points higher or lower, with all other assumptions held constant, the amount of expense projected for 2014 would be lower or higher by approximately $85 million. Funding Considerations The PPA became applicable to us and other large U.S. defense contractors beginning in 2011 and had the effect of accelerating the required amount of annual pension plan contributions. We made contributions related to our qualified defined benefit pension plans of $2.25 billion in 2013, $3.6 billion in 2012, and $2.3 billion in 2011, inclusive of amounts in excess of our required contributions. Under CAS, amounts funded are recovered over time through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, including FMS, and are recognized in our cost of sales and net sales. We recovered $1.5 billion in 2013, $1.1 billion in 2012 and $899 million in 2011 as CAS costs. Amounts contributed in excess of the CAS funding requirements are considered to be prepayment credits under the CAS rules. As of December 31, 2013, our prepayment credits were approximately $9.6 billion, inclusive of interest. Pursuant to the CAS Harmonization rules, the prepayment balance will increase or decrease based on our actual investment returns on plan assets. 50 Table of Contents The CAS Board published its revised pension accounting rules (CAS Harmonization) with an effective date of February 27, 2012 to better align the recovery of pension contributions, including prepayment credits, on U.S. Government contracts with the accelerated funding requirements of the PPA. The CAS Harmonization rules increased our CAS cost beginning in 2013. There is a transition period during which the cost impact of the new rules is phased in, with the full impact occurring in 2017. We expect the incremental impact of CAS Harmonization will increase successively over years 2014 through 2017. Based upon current assumptions which may change, we expect that the increase in 2014 CAS costs caused by CAS Harmonization should be in excess of the pension expense we record under GAAP (FAS pension expense). Accordingly, we expect our FAS/CAS pension adjustment, discussed further in the Business Segment Results of Operations section above, will increase earnings in 2014 as mentioned below rather than decrease earnings as it has the past few years. Trends Our CAS recoveries are expected to exceed our cash contributions in 2014 and for several years thereafter, as we utilize the $9.6 billion prepayment credits under the CAS rules. In 2014, we anticipate recovering $1.6 billion as CAS cost on our contracts and expect to make contributions of $1.0 billion related to our qualified defined benefit pension plans, which would increase our cash flow from operations. We expect our required contributions to continue to be temporarily lowered in 2014 and 2015 as a result of MAP-21. We expect that our 2014 FAS pension expense will be $1.3 billion, which is less than our 2013 FAS pension expense of $1.9 billion, primarily due to the increase in the discount rate. Also, we expect FAS/CAS pension income in 2014 of about $345 million, as compared to FAS/CAS pension expense of $482 million in 2013, primarily due to the increase in the discount rate and higher CAS costs due to recoveries. We expect our 2014 earnings per share to be higher than in 2013, primarily due to our expected FAS/CAS pension income in 2014. Mortality assumptions, as published by the IRS, are used to estimate the life expectancy of plan participants during which they are expected to receive benefit payments. Actuarial studies are currently being conducted that indicate life expectancies are longer and would have the resultant impact of increasing the amount of benefit payments to plan participants. The pension obligation recognized at December 31, 2013 and the amounts estimated for 2014 pension expense, CAS cost, and funding do not reflect the impact of these actuarial studies as such studies have not yet been finalized. The new mortality assumptions, which we expect to adopt at our next measurement date, currently are expected to increase the amount of our pension obligation and decrease our net earnings. We also expect to incorporate the new mortality assumptions into our annual incremental pension funding requirements pursuant to ERISA no earlier than 2016. Environmental Matters We are a party to various agreements, proceedings, and potential proceedings for environmental cleanup issues, including matters at various sites where we have been designated a potentially responsible party (PRP) by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or by a state agency. At December 31, 2013 and 2012, the total amount of liabilities recorded on our Balance Sheet for environmental matters was $997 million and $950 million. We have recorded receivables totaling $863 million and $821 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012 for the portion of environmental costs that are probable of future recovery in pricing of our products and services for agencies of the U.S. Government, as discussed below. The amount that is expected to be allocated to our non-U.S. Government contracts or that is determined to be unallowable for pricing under U.S. Government contracts has been expensed through cost of sales. We project costs and recovery of costs over approximately 20 years. We enter into agreements (e.g. , administrative orders, consent decrees) that document the extent and timing of our environmental remediation obligation. We also are involved in remediation activities at environmental sites where formal agreements either do not exist or do not quantify the extent and timing of our obligation. Environmental cleanup activities usually span many years, which makes estimating the costs more judgmental due to, for example, changing remediation technologies. To determine the costs related to cleanup sites, we have to assess the extent of contamination, effects on natural resources, the appropriate technology to be used to accomplish the remediation, and evolving regulatory environmental standards. We perform quarterly reviews of environmental remediation sites and record liabilities and receivables in the period it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred and the amounts can be reasonably estimated (see the discussion under Environmental Matters in Note 1 Significant Accounting Policies and Note 13 Legal Proceedings, Commitments, and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements). We consider the above factors in our quarterly estimates of the timing and amount of any future costs that may be required for remediation activities, which results in the calculation of a range of estimates for a particular environmental site. We do not discount the recorded liabilities, as the amount and timing 51 Table of Contents of future cash payments are not fixed or cannot be reliably determined. Given the required level of judgment and estimation, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if different assumptions were used or if circumstances were to change (e.g. , a change in environmental standards or a change in our estimate of the extent of contamination). California and the U.S. EPA are each evaluating the need to regulate hexavalent chromium in drinking water, distinct from the current standards which regulate total chromium. In 2011, California health risk agency announced a non-enforceable public health goal for hexavalent chromium which California regulatory agency must consider when promulgating an enforceable drinking water standard, which it is expected to do by late 2014. The goal calls for levels significantly below levels encompassed within the current total chromium standard. In August 2013, California regulatory agency proposed a draft drinking water standard for hexavalent chromium closer to levels encompassed within the current standard. We expect that environmental groups will continue to seek a standard closer to the non-enforceable public health goal and we cannot predict the outcome of California regulatory proceedings. In addition, California is also reevaluating its existing drinking water standard with respect to a second contaminant, perchlorate, and the U.S. EPA is also considering whether to regulate that contaminant in drinking water. With respect to either contaminant, if substantially lower standards are adopted, in either California or at the federal level, we expect a material increase in our estimates for environmental liabilities and the related assets for the portion of the increased costs that are probable of future recovery in the pricing of our products and services for the U.S. Government. The amount that would be allocable to our non-U.S. Government contracts or that is determined to be unallowable for pricing under U.S. Government contracts would be expensed, which may have a material effect on our earnings in any particular interim reporting period. Under agreements reached with the U.S. Government, most of the amounts we spend for environmental remediation are allocated to our operations as general and administrative costs. Under existing government regulations, these and other environmental expenditures relating to our U.S. Government business, after deducting any recoveries received from insurance or other PRPs, are allowable in establishing prices of our products and services. As a result, most of the expenditures we incur are included in our net sales and cost of sales according to U.S. Government agreement or regulation, regardless of the contract form (e.g. cost-reimbursable, fixed-price). We continually evaluate the recoverability of our environmental receivables by assessing, among other factors, U.S. Government regulations, our U.S. Government business base and contract mix, and our history of receiving reimbursement of such costs. As disclosed above, we may record changes in the amount of environmental remediation liabilities as a result of our quarterly reviews of the status of our environmental remediation sites, which would result in a change to the corresponding environmental receivable and a charge to earnings. For example, if we were to determine that the liabilities should be increased by $100 million, the corresponding receivables would be increased by approximately $87 million, with the remainder recorded as a charge to earnings. This allocation is determined annually, based upon our existing and projected business activities with the U.S. Government. We reasonably cannot determine the extent of our financial exposure at all environmental sites with which we are involved. There are a number of former operating facilities we are monitoring or investigating for potential future remediation. In some cases, although a loss may be probable, it is not possible at this time to reasonably estimate the amount of any obligation for remediation activities because of uncertainties (e.g., assessing the extent of the contamination). During any particular quarter, such uncertainties may be resolved, allowing us to estimate and recognize the initial liability to remediate a particular former operating site. The amount of the liability could be material. Upon recognition of the liability, a portion will be recognized as a receivable with the remainder charged to earnings. If we are ultimately found to have liability at those sites where we have been designated a PRP, we expect that the actual costs of remediation will be shared with other liable PRPs. Generally, PRPs that are ultimately determined to be responsible parties are strictly liable for site cleanup and usually agree among themselves to share, on an allocated basis, the costs and expenses for investigation and remediation. Under existing environmental laws, responsible parties are jointly and severally liable and, therefore, we are potentially liable for the full cost of funding such remediation. In the unlikely event that we were required to fund the entire cost of such remediation, the statutory framework provides that we may pursue rights of cost recovery or contribution from the other PRPs. The amounts we record do not reflect the fact that we may recover some of the environmental costs we have incurred through insurance or from other PRPs, which we are required to pursue by agreement and U.S. Government regulation. Goodwill Our goodwill balances were $10.3 billion and $10.4 billion at December 31, 2013 and 2012. We test goodwill for impairment at least annually in the fourth quarter and test more frequently upon the occurrence of certain events or significant changes in circumstances that indicate goodwill may be impaired. Such events or changes in circumstances may 52 Table of Contents include a significant deterioration in overall economic conditions, changes in the business climate of our industry, a decline in our market capitalization, operating performance indicators, competition, reorganizations of our business, or the disposal of all or a portion of a reporting unit. Our goodwill has been allocated to and is tested for impairment at a level referred to as the reporting unit, which is our business segment level or a level below the business segment. The level at which we test goodwill for impairment requires us to determine whether the operations below the business segment constitute a self-sustaining business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results. We initially test goodwill for impairment by comparing the fair value of each reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill of the reporting unit is not impaired. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we compare the implied value of the reporting unit goodwill with the carrying amount of its goodwill. The implied value of the reporting unit goodwill is calculated by creating a hypothetical balance sheet as if the reporting unit had just been acquired. This balance sheet contains all assets and liabilities recorded at fair value (including any assumed intangible assets that may not have any corresponding carrying amount in our balance sheet). The implied value of the reporting unit goodwill is calculated by subtracting the fair value of the net assets from the fair value of the reporting unit. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied value of that goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. The carrying amount of each reporting unit includes the assets and liabilities employed in its operations, allocations of amounts held at the business segment and corporate levels as well as goodwill. The corporate allocations include our postretirement benefit plans liabilities, as determined in accordance with CAS, in order to align the basis of the carrying amounts with the determination of the fair values of our reporting units, which are measured using CAS cost. CAS cost is recovered through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts and, therefore, affects the fair value of each reporting unit. The discount rate used for CAS is currently higher than the discount rate used for GAAP but is expected to trend downward over the next few years, which would increase the amount of CAS liabilities allocated to each reporting unit, contributing to a reduction in the carrying amount of each reporting unit. We estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using a combination of a discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis and market-based valuation methodologies such as comparable public trading values and values observed in market transactions. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgments, including judgments about the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, discount rates, perpetual growth rates, and relevant comparable company earnings multiples and transaction multiples. The cash flows employed in the DCF analyses are based on our best estimate of future sales and operating costs, based primarily on existing firm orders, expected future orders, contracts with suppliers, labor agreements, and general market conditions; changes in working capital; most recent long-term business plans in place at the time of our testing date; and recent operating performance. The discount rates utilized in the DCF analysis are based on the respective reporting unit weighted average cost of capital, which takes into account the relative weights of each component of capital structure (equity and debt) and represents the expected cost of new capital, adjusted as appropriate to consider the risk inherent in future cash flows of the respective reporting unit. In the fourth quarter of 2013, we performed our annual goodwill impairment test for each of our reporting units. The results of these tests indicated that the estimated fair values of our reporting units exceeded their carrying amounts, with the exception of our Technical Services reporting unit within our MFC business segment. During the fourth quarter of 2013, the continuing impact of defense budget reductions and related competitive pressures on the Technical Services business, which typically has smaller customer contracts of a shorter duration, adversely impacted the fair value of this reporting unit. As a result, we compared the implied value of that reporting unit goodwill with the carrying amount of its goodwill, and since the carrying amount exceeded the implied value, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $195 million, net of state tax benefits, in the fourth quarter of 2013 equal to that differential. The fair value of each reporting unit was based on our best estimates and judgment, particularly assumptions regarding the planned defense spending levels of the U.S. Government, our principal customer. If customer budget pressures continue, these circumstances could eventually result in other impairments of goodwill in the future. Our reporting units in our IS&GS business segment and our services businesses at our MFC and MST business segments have smaller customer contracts of short duration and are most susceptible to the impacts of budget reductions. Following the goodwill impairment charge described above, we currently do not believe that any of our reporting units are at risk of a goodwill impairment charge in the near-term, as their fair values are significantly greater than their carrying amounts. Impairment assessments inherently involve management judgments regarding assumptions about expected future sales, profits, and cash flows and the impact of market conditions on those assumptions. Due to the many variables inherent in the estimation of a reporting unit fair value and the relative size of our recorded goodwill, differences in assumptions could have a material effect on the estimated fair value of one or more of our reporting units and could result in a goodwill impairment charge in a future period. 53 Table of Contents 
