CIK: 936468
Company Name: LOCKHEED MARTIN CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-02-28


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Financial Section Roadmap The financial section of our Form 10-K includes management discussion and analysis, our consolidated financial statements, the notes to those financial statements and a five year summary of financial information. We have prepared the following summary, or roadmap, to assist in your review of the financial section. It is designed to give you an overview of our Company and alert you as to some of the more important activities and events that occurred this year. Our Business We principally research, design, develop, manufacture, integrate, operate and sustain advanced technology systems and products, and provide a broad range of management, engineering, technical, scientific, logistic and information services. We mainly serve customers in domestic and international defense, civil agencies, and homeland security. Our sales to agencies of the U.S. Government, including those to the Department of Defense (DoD), represented 84% of our sales in 2007. Of the remaining 16% of sales, approximately 13% related to sales to international customers (including foreign military sales funded, in whole or in part, by the U.S. Government), with the remainder attributable to commercial and other customers. In 2006 and 2005, sales to agencies of the U.S. Government represented 84% and 85% of our total sales. Our main areas of focus are in defense, space, intelligence, homeland security and government information technology. In February 2007, we announced a realignment of our operations to enhance support for critical customer missions and increase our integration of resources. The realignment included the combination of our former Information Technology & Global Services (IT&GS) and Integrated Systems & Solutions (IS&S) business segments into a new business segment named Information Systems & Global Services (IS&GS), along with certain other changes. All business segment disclosures and amounts in this Form 10-K have been reclassified to reflect the realignment. We now operate in four principal business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, IS&GS and Space Systems. As a lead systems integrator, our products and services range from electronics and information systems, including integrated net-centric solutions, to missiles, aircraft and spacecraft. We organize our business segments based on the nature of the products and services offered. Financial Section Overview The financial section includes the following: Management discussion and analysis, or MD&A (pages 32 through 58) provides our management view about industry trends, risks and uncertainties relating to Lockheed Martin, accounting policies that we view as critical in light of our business, our results of operations, including discussions about the key performance drivers of each of our business segments, our financial position and cash flows, commitments and contingencies, important events or transactions that have occurred over the last three years, and forward-looking information, as appropriate. Reports related to the financial statements and internal control over financial reporting (pages 59 through 61) include the following: A report from management, indicating our responsibility for financial reporting, the financial statements, and the system of internal control over financial reporting and an assessment of the effectiveness of those controls; A report from Ernst & Young LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, which includes their opinion on the effectiveness of our system of internal control over financial reporting; and A report from Ernst & Young LLP which includes their opinion on the fair presentation of our financial statements based on their audits. Financial statements (pages 62 through 65) include our consolidated Statements of Earnings, Cash Flows and Stockholders Equity for each of the last three years, and our Balance Sheet as of the end of the last two years. Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Notes to the financial statements (pages 66 through 95) provide insight into and are an integral part of our financial statements. The notes contain explanations of our significant accounting policies, details about certain of the captions on the financial statements, information about significant events or transactions that have occurred, discussions about legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies, and selected financial information relating to our business segments. The notes to the financial statements also are prepared in accordance with GAAP. 32 Table of Contents Highlights The financial section of our Form 10-K describes our ongoing operations, including discussions about particular lines of business or programs, our ability to finance our operating activities, and trends and uncertainties in our industry and how they might affect our future operations. We also discuss those items affecting our results that were not considered in senior management assessment of the operating performance of our business segments. We separately disclose these items to assist in your evaluation of our overall operating performance and financial condition of our consolidated company. We would like to draw your attention to the following items disclosed in this financial section and where you will find them: Topic Location(s) Critical accounting policies: Contract accounting/revenue recognition Page 37 and page 67 Postretirement benefit plans Page 38 and page 83 Environmental matters Page 39, page 67 and page 89 Goodwill Page 40 and page 67 Stock-based compensation Page 41, page 69 and page 80 Discussion of business segments Page 44 and page 90 Liquidity and cash flows Page 51 and page 64 Capital structure and resources Page 52, page 63, page 65 and page 79 Legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies Page 54 and page 87 Income taxes Page 69 and page 77 Industry Considerations U.S. Government Department of Defense Business The President budget proposal for fiscal year 2009 focuses on ensuring America economic prosperity and keeping our country safe. The Administration priorities include balancing the budget by 2012, combating terrorism and protecting the homeland, promoting economic growth, and controlling non-security and entitlement spending. Over half of the discretionary spending in the budget proposal is allocated to defense and other security needs to be addressed by the Departments of Defense, Homeland Security, and State all key customers of ours. For fiscal year 2009, the President budget proposes $515.4 billion for the Department of Defense (DoD), reflecting the Administration commitment to continued modernization of our Armed Forces and sustainment of current capabilities. This amount, called the base budget, excludes any funding for ongoing military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan or the global war on terrorism. These costs, discussed below, are requested as emergency supplemental funding. The fiscal year 2009 DoD base budget is an increase of $35.9 billion, or 7.5%, over the fiscal year 2008 base budget as enacted into law at the end of 2007. The 2009 DoD base budget includes $104.2 billion for procurement of systems and equipment (Procurement) and $79.6 billion for research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E), collectively termed the investment accounts. The proposed investment budget of $183.8 billion represents a nearly 5% increase in the investment accounts over fiscal year 2008 enacted levels and represents a record-high level of funding for these accounts. The Operations and Maintenance accounts, which contain the bulk of funding for training, logistics, services, and other sustainment activities, total approximately $179.8 billion for fiscal year 2009, an increase of $15.6 billion, or nearly 10%, over fiscal year 2008 enacted levels. The balance of the budget, $151.8 billion, includes amounts for military pay and benefits, construction, and other activities. Over the fiscal years 2009-2013, total DoD funding is expected to rise to $549.0 billion in 2013, or 14.4% higher than the fiscal year 2008 budget. Total proposed funding for the DoD over this five-year period is nearly $2.7 trillion, reflecting both the significant increase in the same five-year period in the budget proposal submitted in February of 2007, as well as a small additional increase in this year plan. In addition to the base DoD budget, the Administration is again requesting funding to defray costs for Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. The fiscal year 2009 budget proposal includes $70.0 billion in supplemental funding for the ongoing war on terrorism, which is $20 billion higher than anticipated in last year budget proposal. This amount reflects only costs anticipated to be incurred in the first several months of fiscal year 2009 to ensure continuity of funding during the transition to the next Administration, which will begin in January of 2009, and the budget proposal assumes the next Administration will determine what additional amounts may be required for these activities. The 33 Table of Contents budget proposal also assumes Congress will approve the full $183.8 billion in supplemental funding requested for fiscal year 2008, of which only $86.8 billion had been approved at the time of the budget submission. Total funding requested for the fiscal year 2009 base and supplemental budgets is $585.4 billion. Details of the supplemental funding request have not yet been released. Supplemental funding enables the DoD to proceed on critical modernization and acquisition programs, versus using funds available for those programs to pay for the Iraq and Afghanistan missions. While Congress has expressed concern about the size of supplemental budgets, funding for ongoing operations has not been significantly curtailed by Congress. We expect that Congress will approve the remaining fiscal year 2008 supplemental funding in a timely fashion, and, thus, we do not believe that the cost of ongoing operations in Iraq and Afghanistan will materially impact the investment accounts in the near term. We believe our broad mix of programs and capabilities continues to position us favorably to support the current and future needs of the DoD. Our key aircraft programs are strongly supported in the fiscal year 2009 DoD budget request. The request includes $4.0 billion for 20 F-22 Raptor air dominance fighter aircraft produced under a multiyear contract entered into in 2007, and $6.7 billion for the F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter program. Funding of $933 million is proposed for procurement of 8 C-130J aircraft, as well as advance procurement for 16 additional C-130Js. The budget also includes $798.2 million to continue upgrades of the C-5 strategic airlift aircraft. The fiscal year 2009 budget request includes $10.5 billion, an increase of $600 million over fiscal year 2008, for missile defense capabilities. We are represented in almost every aspect of land, sea, air and space-based missile defense, including the AEGIS weapon system program, the Medium Extended Air Defense System (MEADS), the Patriot Advanced Capability (PAC-3) missile program, the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system, and the Multiple Kill Vehicle (MKV) program. In the areas of space-based intelligence and information superiority, we have leadership positions on programs such as the TSAT Mission Operations System (TMOS), Mobile User Objective System (MUOS), the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) system, the Space-Based Infrared System-High (SBIRS-H) and classified programs. Space-based systems are robustly funded in the fiscal year 2009 request at $10.7 billion. The fiscal year 2009 budget proposes $16.4 billion for an array of command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR) programs. We are well-positioned in these capabilities, including the Air Operations Center Weapons System Integrator, the Warfighter Information Network Tactical, the Combatant Commanders Integrated Command and Control System, and the Global Communications Support System Air Force. We will continue to perform on contracts to develop and deliver essential munitions, missile, and other systems, such as Hellfire, Guided Multiple Launch Rocket Systems, and EQ-36, to our warfighters. We are bringing our systems integration expertise as well as our existing advanced technology products and services into adjacent military product lines, such as the Littoral Combat Ship and the VH-71 U.S. Presidential Helicopter programs, both of which are supported in the fiscal year 2009 budget request. We are well-positioned to expand in these adjacent markets, as well as in unmanned systems capabilities, including air, ground, and underwater systems. We are a significant presence in information technology support and modernization for the DoD. We see opportunities for expansion of our sustainment and logistical support activities to enhance the longevity of the systems procured by our customers and improving global supply chain management, and we see opportunities to grow our business in providing global services and business process management across the DoD enterprise. Most of the aforementioned programs require funding over several annual government budget cycles. There is always an inherent risk that these and other DoD programs could become potential targets for future reductions or elimination of funding to pay for other programs, either in the Administration budget reviews or in the Congressional process of annual appropriations. U.S. Government Non-Department of Defense Business The war on terrorism has focused greater attention on the security of our homeland and the need for better communication and interoperability among law enforcement, civil government agencies, intelligence agencies, and our military services. Our experience in the defense arena, together with our core information technology and services expertise, has enabled us to provide products and services to a number of government agencies, including the Departments of Homeland Security, Justice, Commerce, Health and Human Services, State, Transportation and Energy, the U.S. Postal Service, the Social Security Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Library of Congress. 34 Table of Contents The Administration budget proposal for fiscal year 2009 seeks to limit overall growth in the civil agency budgets to one percent per year or less. Despite this limitation on total non-defense discretionary spending in the President proposal, our key programs are well supported in the budgets of the various agencies with which we do business. The fiscal year 2009 budget submission for NASA is $17.6 billion, $500 million higher than the fiscal year 2008 level, and our key programs are well supported in the request. The next-generation human space flight crew transportation system, known as the Crew Expeditionary Vehicle (CEV) or Orion, is a key element of NASA Vision for Space Exploration and will succeed the Space Shuttle in transporting a new generation of human explorers to and from space. Orion is supported at a level of $1.1 billion in the budget proposal for NASA. Though we have continued to receive new orders from the U.S. military in 2007 for satellites to support missile defense, battlefield communications and other defense initiatives, the environment for our commercial satellites business continues to be very competitive due mainly to low demand for new satellites as a result of excess capacity in the telecommunications industry. We are managing our commercial satellite business with an expectation of receiving fewer orders due to market constraints. The Department of Homeland Security fiscal year 2009 budget request of $37.6 billion is an increase of 7.7% over fiscal year 2008 enacted level. Within the budget, the Coast Guard Deepwater system is funded at $990.4 million. Despite overall decreases in the total budgets for the Departments of Transportation and Justice, the Transportation Workers Identity Card (TWIC) program, the Federal Aviation Administration Automated Flight Services Station Network, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation Sentinel program are well supported in their respective agency budgets. Other key programs are well supported in the civil agency budgets. We have continued to expand our capabilities in critical intelligence, knowledge management and e-Government solutions for our customers, including the Social Security Administration and the EPA, as well for the DoD. We also provide program management, business strategy and consulting, complex systems development and maintenance, complete life-cycle software support, information assurance and enterprise solutions. The expected growth in business process outsourcing has been enabled by rule changes for public/private competitions. In addition, recent trends continue to indicate an increase in demand by federal and civil government agencies for upgrading and investing in new information technology systems and solutions. As a result, we continue to focus our resources in support of infrastructure modernization that allows for interoperability and communication across agencies. In addition, the continuing strong emphasis on homeland security may increase demand for our capabilities in areas such as air traffic management, ports, waterways and cargo security, biohazard detection systems for postal equipment, employee identification and credential verification systems, information systems security, and other global security systems solutions. In addition, we may see an increase in demand from the Department of State and the United Nations for mission services, global security and stability operations, and facility services. Similar to the risks inherent in our defense business, funding for our civil agency business is contingent on approval in annual appropriations acts for each of the agencies with which we have business. Major programs may be funded over several annual government budget cycles, with the risk of future reductions or elimination in the Administration budget review or in the annual Congressional appropriations process. In the civil government business, some risks are unique to particular programs. For example, although indemnification by the U.S. Government to cover potential claims or liabilities resulting from a failure of technologies developed and deployed may be available in some instances for our defense businesses, U.S. Government indemnification may not be available for homeland security purposes. In addition, there are some instances where the U.S. Government could provide indemnification under applicable law, but elects not to do so. While we maintain insurance for some business risks, it is not possible to obtain coverage to protect against all operational risks and liabilities. We generally seek, and in certain cases have obtained, limitation of such potential liabilities related to the sale and use of our homeland security products and services through qualification by the Department of Homeland Security under the SAFETY Act provisions of the Homeland Security Act of 2002. SAFETY Act qualification is less useful in mitigating potential liability for international applications of our homeland security products and services. Where we are unable to secure indemnification or qualification under the SAFETY Act or choose not to do so, we may nevertheless elect to provide the product or service when we think the related risks are manageable or when emergency conditions relative to national security make qualification impracticable. 35 Table of Contents Other Business Considerations We have continued the expansion of our business with foreign governments primarily through Aeronautics, Electronic Systems and with IS&GS acquisition of PAE in 2006. Our international sales are comprised of foreign military sales through the U.S. Government and direct commercial contracts. In Aeronautics, the U.S. Government and eight foreign government partners are working together on the design, testing and production of the F-35 Lightning II. The F-16 Fighting Falcon has been selected by 24 countries, with 52 follow-on buys from 14 customers. The C-130J Super Hercules air mobility aircraft is currently in service in four foreign countries, and is expanding its international footprint with recent orders from Canada and Norway. With regard to the AEGIS weapon system, our Electronic Systems segment performs activities in the development, production, ship integration and test, and lifetime support for ships of international customers (e.g., Japan, Korea and Spain). Electronic Systems also produces the PAC-3 missile, an advanced defensive missile designed to intercept incoming airborne threats, for international customers including Japan, Germany and the Netherlands. The acquisition of PAE has increased our presence in certain less developed countries by providing base camp construction, logistics, democratization and management services, among others, generally through our contracts with such customers as the United Nations and the U.S. Department of State. As a government contractor, we are subject to U.S. Government oversight. The government may ask about and investigate our business practices and audit our compliance with applicable rules and regulations. Depending on the results of those audits and investigations, the government could make claims against us. Under government procurement regulations and practices, an indictment of a government contractor could result in that contractor being fined and suspended from being able to bid on, or be awarded, new government contracts for a period of time. A conviction could result in debarment for a specific period of time. Similar government oversight exists in most other countries where we conduct business. Although we cannot predict the outcome of these types of investigations and inquiries with certainty, based on current facts, we do not believe that any of the claims, audits or investigations pending against us are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. In years in which an appropriations bill has not been signed into law before September 30 (the end of the U.S. Government fiscal year), Congress typically passes a continuing resolution that authorizes U.S. Government agencies to continue to operate, generally at the same funding levels from the prior year, but does not authorize new spending initiatives. During periods covered by continuing resolutions (or until the regular appropriation bills are passed), we may experience delays in procurement of products and services due to lack of funding, and those delays may affect our revenue and profit during the period. We are exposed to risks associated with U.S. Government contracting, including technological uncertainties, dependence on fewer manufacturing suppliers, and obsolescence, as well as Congressional appropriation and allotment of funds each year. Many of our programs involve the development and application of state-of-the-art technologies aimed at achieving challenging goals. As a result, setbacks, delays, cost growth and product failures can occur. We have entered into various joint ventures, teaming and other business arrangements to help support our portfolio of products and services in many of our lines of business, since their activities are closely aligned with our operations. For example, we have a 50% equity interest in United Launch Alliance, LLC (ULA), which provides the production, engineering, test and launch operations associated with U.S. Government launches on Atlas and Delta launch vehicles, and a 50% equity interest in United Space Alliance, LLC (USA) which provides ground processing and other operational services to the Space Shuttle program. Certain of our business arrangements include international partners. The conduct of international business introduces other risks into our operations, including changing economic conditions, fluctuations in relative currency values, regulation by foreign countries and the potential for unanticipated cost increases resulting from the possible deterioration of political relations. The nature of our international business also makes us subject to the export control regulations of the U.S. Department of State and the Department of Commerce. If these regulations are violated, it could result in monetary penalties and denial of export privileges. We are currently unaware of any violations of export control regulations which are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. In August 2006, the President signed into law legislation related to pension plan funding in response to the public concern over the adequacy of such funding. The law has the effect of accelerating the required amount of annual pension plan contributions under the Internal Revenue Code that most companies will be required to pay, effective in 2008. The legislation provides an exemption for us as well as other large U.S. defense contractors that delays the requirement to accelerate funding. The legislation also requires the U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS) Board to modify its 36 Table of Contents pension accounting rules by 2010 to better align the recovery of pension contributions on U.S. Government contracts with the new accelerated funding requirements. The new funding requirements for large U.S. defense contractors will be delayed until the earlier of 2011 or the year in which the changes to the CAS rules are effective. Critical Accounting Policies Contract Accounting / Revenue Recognition Approximately 84% of our sales are derived from long-term contracts for design, development and production activities, with the remainder attributable to contracts to provide other services that are not associated with design, development or production activities. We consider the nature of these contracts and the types of products and services provided when we determine the proper accounting method for a particular contract. Accounting for Design, Development and Production Contracts Generally, we record long-term, fixed-price design, development and production contracts on a percentage of completion basis using units-of-delivery as the basis to measure progress toward completing the contract and recognizing sales. For example, we use this method of revenue recognition on our C-130J tactical transport aircraft program and Multiple Launch Rocket System program. For certain other long-term, fixed-price design, development and production contracts that, along with other factors, require us to deliver minimal quantities over a longer period of time or to perform a substantial level of development effort in comparison to the total value of the contract, sales are recorded when we achieve performance milestones or using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress toward completion. Under the cost-to-cost method of accounting, we recognize sales based on the ratio of costs incurred to our estimate of total costs at completion. As examples, we use this methodology for our F-22 Raptor program and the AEGIS Weapon System program. In some instances, long-term production programs may require a significant level of development and/or a low rate of initial production units in their early phases, but will ultimately require delivery of increased quantities in later, full rate production stages. In those cases, the revenue recognition methodology may change from the cost-to-cost method to the units-of-delivery method as new contracts for different phases of a program are received after considering, among other factors, program and production stability. As we incur costs under cost-reimbursement-type contracts, we record sales and an estimated profit. Cost-reimbursement-type contracts include time and materials and other level-of-effort-type contracts. Examples of this type of revenue recognition include the F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter System Development and Demonstration (SDD) program and the THAAD missile defense program. Most of our long-term contracts are denominated in U.S. dollars, including contracts for sales of military products and services to foreign governments conducted through the U.S. Government ( i.e., foreign military sales). As a general rule, we recognize sales and profits earlier in a production cycle when we use the cost-to-cost and milestone methods of percentage of completion accounting than when we use the units-of-delivery method. In addition, our profits and margins may vary materially depending on the types of long-term contracts undertaken, the costs incurred in their performance, the achievement of other performance objectives, and the stage of performance at which the right to receive fees, particularly under incentive and award fee contracts, is finally determined. Incentives and award fees related to performance on design, development and production contracts, which are generally awarded at the discretion of the customer, as well as penalties related to contract performance, are considered in estimating sales and profit rates. Estimates of award fees are based on actual awards and anticipated performance. Incentive provisions which increase or decrease earnings based solely on a single significant event are generally not recognized until the event occurs. Such incentives and penalties are recorded when there is sufficient information for us to assess anticipated performance. Accounting for design, development and production contracts requires judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract revenues and costs, and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. Due to the size and nature of the work required to be performed on many of our contracts, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. Contract costs include material, labor and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs. We have to make assumptions regarding labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the availability of materials, the length of time to complete the contract (to estimate increases in wages and prices for materials), performance by our subcontractors, and the availability and timing of funding from our customer. For contract change orders, claims or similar items, we apply judgment in estimating the amounts and assessing the potential for realization. These amounts are only included in contract value when they can be reliably estimated and realization is considered probable. We have accounting policies in place to address these as well as other contractual and business arrangements to properly account for long-term contracts. 37 Table of Contents Products and services provided under long-term design, development and production contracts represent approximately 84% of our sales for 2007. Therefore, the amounts we record in our financial statements using contract accounting methods and cost accounting standards are material. Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if our underlying circumstances were to change. For example, if underlying assumptions were to change such that our estimated profit rate at completion for all design, development and production contracts was higher or lower by one percentage point, our Net earnings would increase or decrease by approximately $225 million. When adjustments in estimated contract revenues or estimated costs at completion are required, any changes from prior estimates are recognized by recording adjustments in the current period for the inception-to-date effect of the changes on current and prior periods. Accounting for Services Contracts Revenue under contracts for services other than those associated with design, development or production activities is generally recognized either as services are performed or when a contractually required event has occurred, depending on the contract. This methodology is mainly used by our IS&GS segment. Services contracts primarily include operations and maintenance contracts, and outsourcing-type arrangements. Revenue under such contracts is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the period of contract performance, unless evidence suggests that the revenue is earned or the obligations are fulfilled in a different pattern. Costs incurred under these services contracts are expensed as incurred, except that initial set-up costs are capitalized and recognized ratably over the life of the agreement. Earnings related to such services contracts may fluctuate from period to period, particularly in the earlier phases of the contract. Incentives and award fees related to performance on services contracts are recognized when they are fixed and determinable, generally at the date of award. Other Contract Accounting Considerations The majority of our sales are driven by pricing based on costs incurred to produce products or perform services under contracts with the U.S. Government. Cost-based pricing is determined under the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR). The FAR provides guidance on the types of costs that are allowable in establishing prices for goods and services under U.S. Government contracts. For example, costs such as those related to charitable contributions, advertising, interest expense, and public relations are unallowable, and therefore not recoverable through sales. In addition, we may enter into agreements with the U.S. Government that address the subjects of allowability and allocability of costs to contracts for specific matters. For example, most of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation related to discontinued operations and sites operated in prior years are allocated to our current operations as general and administrative costs under FAR provisions and supporting agreements reached with the U.S. Government. We closely monitor compliance with and the consistent application of our critical accounting policies related to contract accounting. Business segment personnel assess the status of contracts through periodic contract status and performance reviews. Also, regular and recurring evaluations of contract cost, scheduling and technical matters are performed by management personnel independent from the business segment performing work under the contract. Costs incurred and allocated to contracts with the U.S. Government are reviewed for compliance with regulatory standards by our personnel, and are subject to audit by the Defense Contract Audit Agency. For other information on accounting policies we have in place for recognizing sales and profits, see our discussion under Sales and earnings in Note 1 to the financial statements. Postretirement Benefit Plans Most of our employees are covered by defined benefit pension plans (pension plans), and we provide health care and life insurance benefits to eligible retirees. Our earnings may be negatively or positively impacted by the amount of expense or income we record for our employee benefit plans. This is particularly true with expense or income for pension plans because those calculations are sensitive to changes in several key economic assumptions and workforce demographics. Non-union represented employees hired after January 1, 2006 do not participate in our defined benefit pension plans, but are eligible to participate in a defined contribution plan in addition to our other retirement savings plans. They also have the ability to participate in our retiree medical plans, but we do not subsidize the cost of their participation. We account for our pension plans using Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (FAS) 158, Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans, an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106 and 132(R) and FAS 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions. FAS 158, which we adopted as of December 31, 2006, required us to recognize on a plan-by-plan basis the funded status of our postretirement benefit plans, with a corresponding adjustment to Accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax, in Stockholders equity. Prior to the end of 2006, 38 Table of Contents unrecognized actuarial losses and prior service costs were netted against the plans funded status on our Balance Sheet in accordance with FAS 87. The funded status is measured as the difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the projected benefit obligation (PBO) of the plan. FAS 87 requires that the amounts we record, including the expense or income for the plans, be computed using actuarial valuations. These valuations include many assumptions, including assumptions we make relating to financial market and other economic conditions. Changes in key economic indicators can result in changes in the assumptions we use. The key year-end assumptions used to estimate pension expense or income for the following calendar year are the discount rate, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and the rates of increase in future compensation levels, with the more subjective of these being the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. We use judgment in reassessing these assumptions each year because we have to consider current market conditions and, in the case of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, past investment experience, judgments about future market trends, changes in interest rates and equity market performance. We also have to consider factors like the timing and amounts of expected contributions to the plans and benefit payments to plan participants. The discount rate we select impacts both the calculation of the PBO at the end of the year as well as the calculation of net postretirement benefit plan cost in the subsequent year. We evaluate several data points in order to arrive at an appropriate discount rate. These items include quoted rates from long-term bond indices and changes in long-term bond rates over the past year. At the close of 2007, the annualized Merrill Lynch index for long-term AA corporate bonds (15+ years) was 6.37%. We also calculate the approximate average yields on securities that were selected to match our projected pension-related cash flows. Our pension-related cash flows are put into actuarial models that included data for corporate bonds rated AA or better. The available universe of bonds are adjusted to reflect call provisions, outstanding issue amount, and bonds that are considered outliers. As of December 31, 2007, the actuarial models calculated rates ranging from 6.35% to 6.57%. The data we collect provides important inputs into our determination of an appropriate discount rate. After reviewing all of the above data, we determined that the most appropriate discount rate for calculating our benefit obligations as of December 31, 2007 would be 6.375%, compared to 5.875% used at the end of 2006. The discount rate assumption we select at the end of each year is based on our best estimates and judgment. A reasonably possible change of plus or minus 25 basis points in the 6.375% discount rate assumption at December 31, 2007, with all other assumptions held constant, would decrease or increase the amount of the projected benefit obligation we recorded at the end of 2007 by approximately $900 million, resulting in an after-tax increase or decrease in Stockholders equity at the end of the year of approximately $580 million. If the 5.875% discount rate at December 31, 2006 that was used to compute 2007 pension expense had been 25 basis points higher or lower, with all other assumptions held constant, the amount of expense recorded would have been lower or higher by approximately $90 million. The long-term rate of return assumption represents the expected average rate of earnings on the funds invested, or to be invested, to provide for the benefits included in the plan obligation. This assumption is based on several factors including historical market index returns, the anticipated long-term allocation of plan assets, the historical return data for the trust funds, plan expenses and the potential to outperform market index returns. The actual return in any specific year likely will differ from the assumption, but the average expected return over a long-term future horizon should be approximated by the assumption; therefore, changes in this assumption are less frequent than changes in the discount rate. Any variance in a given year should not, by itself, suggest that the assumption should be changed. Patterns of variances should be reviewed over time and then combined with expectations for the future. Environmental Matters We are a party to various agreements, proceedings and potential proceedings for environmental cleanup issues, including matters at various sites where we have been designated a potentially responsible party (PRP) by the EPA or by a state agency. We record financial statement accruals for environmental matters in the period that it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred and the amounts can be reasonably estimated (see the discussion under Environmental Matters in Note 1 to the financial statements). Judgment is required when we develop assumptions and estimate costs expected to be incurred for environmental remediation activities due to difficulties in assessing the extent of environmental remediation to be performed, complex environmental regulations and remediation technologies, cost allowability issues, agreements among PRPs to share in the cost of remediation as discussed below and other factors. We enter into agreements ( e.g., administrative orders, consent decrees) which document the extent and timing of our environmental remediation obligation. We are also involved in remediation activities at environmental sites where formal 39 Table of Contents agreements exist, but do not quantify the extent and timing of our obligation. Environmental cleanup activities usually cover several years, which makes estimating the costs more judgmental due to, for example, changing remediation technologies. To determine the costs related to cleanup sites, we have to assess the extent of contamination, the appropriate technology to be used to accomplish the remediation, and evolving regulatory environmental standards. We consider these factors in our estimates of the timing and amount of any future costs that may be required for remediation actions, which generally results in the calculation of a range of estimates for a particular environmental site. We record a liability for the amount within the range which we determine to be our best estimate of the cost of remediation or, in cases where no amount within the range is better than another, we record an amount at the low end of the range. We review the estimates periodically and make adjustments to reflect changes in facts and circumstances. Given the required level of judgment and estimation, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if different assumptions were used or if circumstances were to change ( e.g., a change in environmental standards). If we are ultimately found to have liability at those sites where we have been designated a PRP, we expect that the actual costs of remediation will be shared with other liable PRPs. Generally, PRPs that are ultimately determined to be responsible parties are strictly liable for site cleanup and usually agree among themselves to share, on an allocated basis, the costs and expenses for investigation and remediation of hazardous materials. Under existing environmental laws, responsible parties are jointly and severally liable and, therefore, we are potentially liable for the full cost of funding such remediation. In the unlikely event that we were required to fund the entire cost of such remediation, the statutory framework provides that we may pursue rights of contribution from the other PRPs. The amounts we record do not reflect the fact that we may recover some of the environmental costs we have incurred through insurance or from other PRPs, which we are required to pursue by agreement and U.S. Government regulation. Under agreements reached with the U.S. Government, most of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation are allocated to our operations as general and administrative costs. Under existing government regulations, these and other environmental expenditures relating to our U.S. Government business, after deducting any recoveries received from insurance or other PRPs, are allowable in establishing prices of our products and services. As a result, a substantial amount of the expenditures we incur are being included in our Net sales and Cost of sales according to U.S. Government agreement or regulation. At the end of 2007, the total amount of liabilities recorded on our Balance Sheet for environmental matters was $572 million. About 40% of the liability relates to former operating sites in Redlands and Burbank, California, mainly for remediation of soil and groundwater contamination. The remainder of the liability relates to other properties (including current operating facilities and certain facilities operated in prior years) for which our obligation is probable and the financial exposure can be reasonably estimated. We have recorded assets totaling $480 million at December 31, 2007 for the portion of environmental costs that are probable of future recovery in pricing of our products and services to agencies of the U.S. Government. The amount that is expected to be allocated to our commercial businesses has been expensed through Cost of sales. Any recoveries we receive from other PRPs or insurance would reduce the allocated amounts included in our future U.S. Government Net sales and Cost of sales. Goodwill Impairment In accordance with FAS 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets , we review Goodwill for impairment on an annual basis and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of Goodwill may not be recoverable. Such events or circumstances could include significant changes in the business climate of our industry, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or disposal of a portion of a reporting unit. The assessment is performed at the reporting unit level which we generally define as the business segment level or one level below the business segment. Our annual testing date is October 1. Performing the Goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units and the determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. We estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using a discounted cash flow methodology which requires significant judgment, including estimation of future cash flows. Forecasts of future cash flows are based on our best estimate of future sales and operating costs, based primarily on existing firm orders, expected future orders, contracts with suppliers, labor agreements, general market conditions and the determination of our weighted average cost of capital. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and/or Goodwill impairment for each reporting unit. We evaluate Goodwill for impairment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value, including Goodwill. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, we measure impairment by comparing the derived fair value of Goodwill to its carrying value, and any impairment determined is recorded in the current period. 40 Table of Contents Our Goodwill at December 31, 2007 amounted to $9.4 billion. We completed our assessment of Goodwill as of October 1, 2007 and determined that no impairment existed at that date. Changes in estimates and assumptions we make in conducting our Goodwill assessment could affect the estimated fair value of one or more of our reporting units and could result in a Goodwill impairment charge in a future period. However, a 10% decrease in the estimated fair value of any of our reporting units at October 1, 2007 would not have resulted in a Goodwill impairment charge. Stock-Based Compensation We account for our stock-based compensation under the provisions of FAS 123(R), Share-Based Payments . We recognize compensation cost related to all share-based payments, including restricted stock units (RSUs) and stock options. Compensation cost for RSUs is based on the market value of our common stock on the date of the award. We estimate the fair value for stock options at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Our stock options do not include market or performance conditions. We generally recognize the compensation cost for RSUs and stock options ratably over a three-year vesting period. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires us to make estimates and assumptions in determining certain inputs to the model, including a volatility factor for our stock, an expected life of the option and a risk-free interest rate. We estimate volatility based on the historical volatility of our daily stock price over the past five years, which is commensurate with the expected life of the options. We base the average expected life on the contractual term of the stock option, historical trends in employee exercise activity and post-vesting employment termination trends. We analyzed the option exercise patterns of our employees and determined there are no significant differences between employee groups. We base the risk-free interest rate on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected life assumed at the date of grant. We also are required to estimate forfeitures at the date of grant which we base on historical experience. If any of our estimates or assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model were to change significantly, stock-based compensation expense could differ materially in the future from the amount recorded in 2007. Compensation cost recognized in 2007 totaled $149 million. Acquisition and Divestiture Activities We continuously strive to strengthen our portfolio of products and services to meet the current and future needs of our customers. We accomplish this not only internally, through our independent research and development activities, but also through acquisitions. We selectively pursue the acquisition of businesses and investments that complement our current portfolio and allow access to new customers or technologies. We have made a number of such niche acquisitions of businesses during the past several years. Over the last five years, we have paid $2.6 billion to complete 18 such acquisitions. Conversely, we may also explore the divestiture of businesses, investments and real estate. If we were to decide to sell any such assets, the resulting gains, if any, would be recorded when the transactions are completed and losses, if any, would be recorded when the value of the related asset is determined to be impaired. Acquisitions We used approximately $160 million in 2007 for acquisition activities including the acquisition of, among others, Management Systems Designers Inc. (MSD), a provider of information technology (IT) and scientific solutions supporting government life science, national security, and other civil agency missions. The amount also includes certain payments related to acquisitions completed in prior years. The acquisitions were not material to our consolidated results of operations in 2007. In 2006 and 2005, we completed acquisitions of the following businesses: Year ended December 31, 2006 Pacific Architects and Engineers, Inc., a provider of services to support military readiness, peacekeeping missions, nation-building activities, and disaster relief services (included in our IS&GS segment); Savi Technology, Inc., a developer of active radio frequency identification solutions (included in our IS&GS segment); Aspen Systems Corporation, an information management company that delivers a range of business process and technology solutions (included in our IS&GS segment); ISX Corporation, a provider of military decision systems and other information technology solutions (included in our Electronic Systems segment); and HMT Vehicles, a military vehicle design company (included in our Electronic Systems segment). Year ended December 31, 2005 The SYTEX Group, Inc., a provider of information technology solutions and technical support services (included in our IS&GS segment); 41 Table of Contents STASYS Limited, a U.K.-based technology and consulting firm specializing in network communications and defense interoperability (included in our IS&GS segment); INSYS Group Limited, a U.K.-based diversified supplier of military communications systems, weapons systems and advanced analysis services (included in our Electronic Systems segment); and Coherent Technologies, Inc., a supplier of high-performance, laser-based remote sensing systems (included in the Space Systems segment). The aggregate cash paid for the 2006 acquisitions, as well as for amounts paid in 2006 related to acquisitions completed in 2005, was $1.1 billion. The aggregate cash paid for the 2005 acquisitions, as well as for amounts paid in 2005 related to acquisitions completed in prior periods, was $564 million. We accounted for the acquisitions under the purchase method of accounting, and therefore recorded purchase accounting adjustments by allocating the purchase price to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The acquisitions were not material to our consolidated results of operations in 2006 or 2005. Divestitures During 2007, 2006 and 2005, we continued to execute the strategy to monetize certain of our equity investments and real estate by divesting of the following: Year ended December 31, 2007 Our remaining 20% interest in Comsat International, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $25 million in Other income (expense), net, and increased Net earnings by $16 million ($0.04 per share); and Certain land in California, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $25 million in Other income (expense), net, and increased Net earnings by $16 million ($0.04 per share). Year ended December 31, 2006 Our ownership interests in Lockheed Khrunichev Energia International, Inc. (LKEI) and International Launch Services, Inc. (ILS). The gain on the sale was deferred pending the disposition of guarantees associated with providing launch services for certain customers (see Note 2); 21 million shares of Inmarsat plc, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $127 million in Other income (expense), net, and increased Net earnings by $83 million ($0.19 per share); The assets of Space Imaging, LLC, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $23 million in Other income (expense), net, and increased Net earnings by $15 million ($0.03 per share); and Certain land in California and Florida, which resulted in an aggregate gain, net of state income taxes, of $51 million in Other income (expense), net, and increased Net earnings by $33 million ($0.08 per share). Year ended December 31, 2005 Our interest in NeuStar, Inc., which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $30 million in Other income (expense), net, and increased Net earnings by $19 million ($0.04 per share); 16 million of our Inmarsat plc shares for $89 million. In addition, primarily as a result of a successful initial public offering by Inmarsat, we recognized a gain of $42 million which had previously been deferred. Together, these transactions resulted in gains, net of state income taxes, totaling $126 million in Other income (expense), net, and increased Net earnings by $82 million ($0.18 per share); and Our 25% interest in Intelsat, Ltd., which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $47 million in Other income (expense), net, and increased Net earnings by $31 million ($0.07 per share). United Launch Alliance On December 1, 2006, we completed the formation of ULA (see Note 2) with The Boeing Company (Boeing). The net book value of the assets we contributed and the liabilities that ULA assumed from us was initially determined to be $190 million as of the date of closing. We accounted for the transfer at net book value, with no gain or loss recognized. In July 2007, we reached agreement with Boeing with respect to resolution of the final working capital and the value of the launch vehicle support contracts that we each contributed to form ULA, as contemplated by the original agreements. In connection with the resolution agreements, we made additional contributions to ULA in respect of the working capital adjustment totaling $177 million which resulted in an increase in our investment in ULA. ULA also conformed the accounting policies of the contributed businesses. The adoption of conformed accounting policies affected the book value of the assets and liabilities that each of us contributed and resulted in adjustments to ULA balance sheet as of December 1, 2006. After the agreement was implemented and the adjustments were recorded, our 50% ownership share of ULA net assets exceeded the book value of our investment by approximately $395 million, which we are recognizing ratably over 10 years 42 Table of Contents as Equity in net earnings (losses) of equity investees in Other income (expense), net. Our investment in ULA totaled $402 million and $197 million at December 31, 2007 and 2006. ULA did not have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows in 2007. Results of Operations Since our operating cycle is long-term and involves many types of development and production contracts with varying production delivery schedules, the results of operations of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of recorded net sales and profits, may not be indicative of future operating results. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context. All per share amounts cited in this discussion are presented on a per diluted share basis. Net Sales (In billions) The following discussion of net sales and operating results provides an overview of our operations by focusing on key elements in our Statement of Earnings. The Discussion of Business Segments which follows describes the contributions of each of our business segments to our consolidated Net sales and Operating profit for 2007, 2006 and 2005. We follow an integrated approach for managing the performance of our business, and generally focus the discussion of our results of operations around major lines of business versus distinguishing between products and services. Product sales are predominantly generated in the Aeronautics, Electronic Systems and Space Systems segments, while most of our services revenues are generated in our IS&GS segment. For 2007, Net sales were $41.9 billion, a 6% increase over 2006 sales. Sales for 2006 were $39.6 billion, a 6% increase over 2005 sales. Sales increased during 2007 in all segments as compared to 2006. Except for anticipated reductions at Aeronautics, sales increased in all segments in 2006 as compared to 2005. The U.S. Government is our largest customer, accounting for about 84% of our sales in 2007, 84% in 2006, and 85% in 2005. Other income (expense), net was $293 million for 2007 compared to $336 million in 2006. This decrease was primarily due to gains recognized in 2006 from the sale of shares of Inmarsat and assets of Space Imaging, offset partially by increased equity earnings in affiliates in 2007. Other income (expense), net increased $20 million from 2005 to 2006 due to higher equity earnings in affiliates and gains from the sale of land in 2006. Effective January 1, 2006, we adopted FAS 123(R), Share-Based Payments , and related rules, on a modified prospective basis (see Note 11). Under this method, we recognize compensation cost related to the estimated fair value of nonvested stock options and restricted stock granted in 2006 and prior years. Prior to January 1, 2006, we measured compensation cost for stock options using the intrinsic value method, but disclosed the pro forma effects on Net earnings and Earnings per share as if compensation cost had been recognized based upon the fair value-based method. During the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, we recorded compensation cost related to stock options and restricted stock totaling $149 million and $111 million which is included in the Statement of Earnings in Cost of sales. The net impact to earnings was $96 million ($0.22 per share) and $70 million ($0.16 per share). Compensation cost related to restricted stock in 2005 was not material. As of December 31, 2007, we had $136 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested stock options, restricted stock units and restricted stock awards. That cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.6 years. State income taxes are included in our operations as general and administrative costs and, under U.S. Government regulations, are allowable in establishing prices for the products and services we sell to the U.S. Government. Therefore, a substantial portion of state income taxes is included in our Net sales and Cost of sales. As a result, the impact on our Operating profit of certain transactions and other matters disclosed in this Form 10-K is disclosed net of state income taxes. 43 Table of Contents Our Operating profit for 2007 was $4.5 billion, an increase of 20% compared to 2006. Our Operating profit for 2006 was $3.8 billion, an increase of 32% compared to 2005. Operating profit increased across all business segments in both comparative periods and was also favorably impacted by lower Unallocated Corporate costs, primarily due to a decline in the FAS/CAS pension adjustment. Interest expense for 2007 was $352 million, $9 million lower than 2006. This decrease was mainly driven by lower interest expense associated with the September 2006 debt exchange. Interest expense for 2006 was $361 million, $9 million lower than in 2005. This decrease in interest expense primarily was due to reductions in our debt outstanding. Other non-operating income (expense), net totaled $193 million in 2007, an increase of 5% from 2006, and was $183 million in 2006, an increase of 38% from 2005. The increase in 2007 was mainly due to the $16 million of debt exchange expenses recorded in 2006, as there were no comparable charges in 2007. The increase in 2006 over 2005 primarily was attributable to higher interest rates and amounts invested. Our effective tax rates were 30.6% for 2007, 29.6% for 2006, and 30.2% for 2005. The effective rates for all years were lower than the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to tax deductions for U.S. manufacturing activities, dividends related to our employee stock ownership plan, and research and development (R&D) tax credits. In addition, the rate for 2007 reflected a reduction in Income tax expense of $59 million related to the completion of an IRS audit in the first quarter. The rate for 2006 reflected a reduction in Income tax expense of $62 million related to a refund claim for additional extraterritorial income exclusion (ETI) benefits in prior years recognized in the third quarter of 2006. The rates in 2006 and 2005 also reflected tax benefits related to ETI. The increase in the 2007 effective tax rate when compared to 2006 is primarily the result of the elimination of the extraterritorial tax benefits in 2007, partially offset by additional tax benefits resulting from a statutory increase in U.S. manufacturing benefits, new legislation that provided enhanced R&D tax credits, and the favorable closure of an IRS audit. The small decrease in the 2006 tax rate when compared to 2005 is primarily the result of higher extraterritorial tax benefits in 2006 resulting from a refund claim for additional prior year benefits. Net earnings increased as compared to the prior year for the sixth consecutive year. We reported Net earnings of $3.0 billion ($7.10 per share) in 2007, Net earnings of $2.5 billion ($5.80 per share) in 2006, and Net earnings of $1.8 billion ($4.10 per share) in 2005. Discussion of Business Segments In February 2007, we announced a realignment of our operations to enhance support for critical customer missions and increase our integration of resources. The realignment included the combination of our IT&GS and IS&S business segments into a new business segment named IS&GS, along with certain other changes. We now operate in four principal business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, IS&GS and Space Systems. We organize our business segments based on the nature of the products and services offered. Our Aeronautics business segment is engaged in the design, research and development, systems integration, production, sustainment, support and upgrade of advanced military aircraft, air vehicles and related technologies, primarily for U.S. and allied country military services. Combat aircraft programs include the F-35, F-22 and F-16 aircraft. The F-35 Lightning II is currently in the System Development and Demonstration phase and has entered low rate production. Aeronautics has been producing F-22 Raptors since 1997, and delivered 24 to the U.S. Air Force in 2007, bringing the total deliveries to 110. We also received a 60 aircraft multi-year contract for Production Lots 7, 8 and 9. A total of 41 F-16 Fighting Falcons were delivered in 2007 worldwide, bringing the total deliveries to 4,389. Sales at Aeronautics are expected to decline in 2008 primarily due to a projected reduction in F-16 activities. In the area of Air Mobility, we produce the C-130J Super Hercules aircraft. We delivered 12 aircraft in 2007. A total of 213 have been ordered and 159 delivered through 2007. In addition to aircraft production, the segment provides logistics support, sustainment, and upgrade modification and services for its aircraft. The Electronic Systems business segment is engaged in the design, research, development, integration, production and sustainment of high performance systems and subsystems for undersea, shipboard, land and airborne applications, including tactical missiles, surface ship and submarine combat systems, ground combat vehicle integration and radars, among others. With such a broad portfolio of products and services, many of its activities involve a combination of both development and production contracts with varying delivery schedules. This business segment has continued to expand its core competencies 44 Table of Contents as a leading systems integrator. Some of its more significant programs, including the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system, the VH-71 Presidential helicopter, the AEGIS weapon system and the Arrowhead fire control system for the Apache helicopter, demonstrate the diverse products and services Electronic Systems provides. The IS&GS business segment combines a full range of information competencies with a global delivery capability. The segment provides full life cycle support and expertise in the areas of software and systems engineering, including in space, air and ground systems, and provides logistics, mission operations support, peacekeeping and nation-building services for a wide variety of U.S. defense and civil government agencies. Key programs and activities include the Transformational Communications MILSATCOM Mission Operations Segment (TMOS) program, the FAA Automated Flight Service Station (AFSS) program and a number of task order vehicles (indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) contracts) in our Information Technology line of business. We expect continued strong growth in providing information technology solutions to government agencies. The Space Systems business segment is engaged in the design, research, development, engineering and production of satellites for both government and commercial customers, strategic and defensive missile systems and space transportation systems. Through ownership interests in two joint ventures, the segment also includes Space Shuttle processing activities and expendable launch services for the U.S. Government. Government satellite programs include the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) system, the Mobile User Objective System (MUOS), the Global Positioning System (GPS) and the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS). Strategic and missile defense programs include the Targets and Countermeasures Program and the Fleet Ballistic Missile program. Space transportation includes the NASA Orion program. In the following table of financial data, total Operating profit of the business segments is reconciled to the corresponding consolidated amount. The reconciling item Unallocated Corporate expense, net includes the FAS/CAS pension adjustment (see the discussion of Postretirement Benefit Plans under Critical Accounting Policies ), costs for stock-based compensation programs, the effects of items not considered part of management evaluation of segment operating performance, and Corporate costs not allocated to the operating segments, as well as other miscellaneous Corporate activities. Since the activities of the investees in which certain business segments hold equity interests are closely aligned with the operations of those segments, the equity earnings (losses) from those investees are included in the Operating profit of the respective segments. This table shows Net sales and Operating profit of the business segments and reconciles to the consolidated total. For all years presented, interest income has been reclassified from segment Operating profit and Unallocated Corporate income (expense), net to Other non-operating income (expense), net to conform to the 2007 consolidated Statement of Earnings presentation (see Note 1). In 2006, we reclassified $199 million, including $182 million from Unallocated Corporate expense, net and $17 million from across the business segments. In 2005, we reclassified $143 million, including $132 million from Unallocated Corporate expense, net and $11 million from across the business segments. The impact on the individual segments operating results was not material. In addition, we reclassified $16 million in expenses associated with the debt exchange in 2006 and $10 million related to a charge for the early repayment of debt in 2005, each from Unallocated Corporate expense, net to Other non-operating income (expense), net in the respective years. (In millions) 2007 2006 2005 Net sales Aeronautics $ 12,303 $ 12,188 $ 12,349 Electronic Systems 11,143 10,519 9,811 Information Systems & Global Services 10,213 8,990 8,233 Space Systems 8,203 7,923 6,820 Total $ 41,862 $ 39,620 $ 37,213 Operating profit Aeronautics $ 1,476 $ 1,221 $ 1,018 Electronic Systems 1,410 1,264 1,078 Information Systems & Global Services 949 804 720 Space Systems 856 742 605 Total business segments 4,691 4,031 3,421 Unallocated Corporate expense, net (164 ) (261 ) (568 ) Total $ 4,527 $ 3,770 $ 2,853 45 Table of Contents The following segment discussions also include information relating to negotiated backlog for each segment. Total negotiated backlog was approximately $76.7 billion and $75.9 billion at December 31, 2007 and 2006. This amount included both funded backlog (unfilled firm orders for which funding has been both authorized and appropriated by the customer Congress in the case of U.S. Government agencies) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding has not yet been appropriated). Negotiated backlog does not include unexercised options or task orders to be issued under indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) contracts. Funded backlog was approximately $42.3 billion at December 31, 2007. The Aeronautics segment generally includes fewer programs that have much larger sales and operating results than programs included in the other segments. Therefore, due to the large number of comparatively smaller programs in the remaining segments, the discussions of the results of operations of these business segments generally focus on lines of business within the segments rather than on specific programs. The following tables of financial information and related discussions of the results of operations of our business segments are consistent with the presentation of segment information in Note 15 to the financial statements. In our discussions of comparative results, changes in Net sales and Operating profit are generally expressed in terms of volume and/or performance. Volume refers to increases (or decreases) in sales resulting from varying production activity levels, deliveries or service levels on individual contracts. Volume changes typically include a corresponding change in Operating profit based on the estimated profit rate at completion for a particular contract for design, development and production activities. Changes in segment Operating profit are also expressed in terms of performance. Performance generally refers to changes in contract profit rates at completion. These changes on our contracts for products usually relate to profit recognition associated with revisions to total estimated costs at completion of the contract that reflect improved (or deteriorated) operating or award fee performance on a particular contract. Changes in estimates of Net sales and Operating profit on contracts for products are recognized by recording adjustments in the current period for the inception-to-date effect of the changes on current and prior periods. Segment Operating Profit (In millions) Aeronautics Aeronautics operating results included the following: (In millions) 2007 2006 2005 Net sales $ 12,303 $ 12,188 $ 12,349 Operating profit 1,476 1,221 1,018 Backlog at year-end 26,300 26,900 31,100 Net sales for Aeronautics increased by 1% in 2007 compared to 2006. The increase in Net sales was due to growth in Other Aeronautics programs and Combat Aircraft, which were offset partially by declines in Air Mobility. Other Aeronautics programs increased $106 million primarily due to higher volume in sustainment services activities. Combat Aircraft sales increased $43 million mainly due to volume increases on the F-22 program that more than offset declines on F-16 programs. These increases were offset partially by a $34 million decline in Air Mobility sales due to lower volume on C-130 programs. Net sales for Aeronautics decreased by 1% in 2006 compared to 2005. The anticipated decline in Net sales was due to a decline in Air Mobility sales that was offset partially by increases in Combat Aircraft and Other Aeronautics programs sales. 46 Table of Contents Air Mobility sales declined by $535 million primarily due to C-130J deliveries (12 in 2006 compared to 15 in 2005) and lower volume on the C-5 program. Combat Aircraft sales increased by $292 million mainly due to higher F-35 and F-22 volume, partially offset by reduced volume on F-16 programs. Other Aeronautics programs sales increased by $83 million primarily due to higher volume in sustainment services activities. Operating profit for the segment increased 21% in 2007 compared to 2006. Operating profit increases in Combat Aircraft more than offset decreases in Other Aeronautics programs and Air Mobility. Combat Aircraft operating profit increased $326 million mainly due to improved performance on F-22 and F-16 programs. Air Mobility and Other Aeronautics programs declined $77 million due to lower operating profit in support and sustainment activities. Operating profit for the segment increased 20% in 2006 compared to 2005. Operating profit increased in both Combat Aircraft and Air Mobility. Combat Aircraft increased $114 million, mainly due to higher volume on the F-35 and F-22 programs, and improved performance on F-16 programs. The improvement for the year was also attributable in part to the fact that in 2005, operating profit included a reduction in earnings on the F-35 program. Air Mobility operating profit increased $84 million, mainly due to improved performance on C-130J sustainment activities in 2006. Backlog decreased in 2007 as compared to 2006 primarily as a result of sales volume on the F-35 program. This decrease was offset partially by increased orders on the F-22 and C-130J programs. Electronic Systems Electronic Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2007 2006 2005 Net sales $ 11,143 $ 10,519 $ 9,811 Operating profit 1,410 1,264 1,078 Backlog at year-end 21,200 19,700 18,600 Net sales for Electronic Systems increased by 6% in 2007 compared to 2006. Sales increased in Missiles & Fire Control (M&FC), Maritime Systems & Sensors (MS2), and Platform, Training & Energy (PT&E). M&FC sales increased $258 million mainly due to higher volume in fire control systems and air defense programs, which more than offset declines in tactical missile programs. MS2 sales grew $254 million due to volume increases in undersea and radar systems activities that were offset partially by decreases in surface systems activities. PT&E sales increased $113 million, primarily due to higher volume in platform integration activities, which more than offset declines in distribution technology activities. Net sales for Electronic Systems increased by 7% in 2006 compared to 2005. Higher volume in platform integration activities led to increased sales of $329 million at PT&E. MS2 sales increased $267 million primarily due to surface systems activities. Air defense programs contributed to increased sales of $118 million at M&FC. Operating profit for the segment increased by 12% in 2007 compared to 2006, representing an increase in all three lines of business during the year. Operating profit increased $70 million at PT&E primarily due to higher volume and improved performance on platform integration activities. MS2 operating profit increased $32 million due to higher volume on undersea and tactical systems activities that more than offset lower volume on surface systems activities. At M&FC, operating profit increased $32 million due to higher volume in fire control systems and improved performance in tactical missile programs, which partially were offset by performance on certain international air defense programs in 2006. Operating profit for the segment increased by 17% in 2006 compared to 2005. Operating profit increased by $74 million at MS2 mainly due to higher volume on surface systems and undersea programs. PT&E operating profit increased $61 million mainly due to improved performance on distribution technology activities. Higher volume on air defense programs contributed to a $52 million increase in operating profit at M&FC. The increase in backlog during 2007 over 2006 resulted primarily from increased orders for certain tactical missile programs and fire control systems at M&FC and platform integration programs at PT&E. 47 Table of Contents Information Systems & Global Services Information Systems & Global Services operating results included the following: (In millions) 2007 2006 2005 Net sales $ 10,213 $ 8,990 $ 8,233 Operating profit 949 804 720 Backlog at year-end 11,800 10,500 9,200 Net sales for IS&GS increased by 14% in 2007 compared to 2006. During the year, sales increased in Global Services, Information Systems, and Mission Solutions. Global Services sales increased $609 million due to higher volume and growth in mission services activities including the impact of the acquisition of PAE in September 2006. Information Systems sales increased $401 million due to growth in information technology and the acquisition of MSD in February 2007. Higher volume in mission and combat support activities accounted for the majority of the $216 million sales increase at Mission Solutions. Net sales for IS&GS increased by 9% in 2006 compared to 2005. During the year, sales increases in Global Services and Mission Solutions more than offset declines in Information Systems. Global Services sales increased $761 million primarily due to higher volume in mission services activities and the acquisition of PAE. Information Systems sales decreased $143 million primarily due to lower volume in information technology activities. At Mission Solutions, sales increased $140 million due to higher volume in global security solutions activities that more than offset declines in mission and combat support solutions. Operating profit for the segment increased by 18% in 2007 compared to 2006. During the year, operating profit increased in all three lines of business. Mission Solutions operating profit increased $90 million due to higher volume in mission and combat support solutions and aviation solutions activities. Global Services operating profit growth of $35 million was primarily attributable to the acquisition of PAE. Information Systems increased $34 million primarily due to improved performance of information technology activities and the acquisition of MSD. Operating profit for the segment increased by 12% in 2006 compared to 2005. During the year, operating profit increased in all three lines of business. Higher volume in global security solutions activities accounted for the majority of the $41 million increase in operating profit at Mission Solutions. Information Systems operating profit increased $34 million mainly due to improved performance in information technology and systems integration activities. Operating profit increased $15 million in Global Services primarily due to the acquisition of PAE. The increase in backlog during 2007 over 2006 was due to increased orders in Mission Support activities and Information Systems programs. Space Systems Space Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2007 2006 2005 Net sales $ 8,203 $ 7,923 $ 6,820 Operating profit 856 742 605 Backlog at year-end 17,400 18,800 15,900 Net sales for Space Systems increased 4% in 2007 compared to 2006. During the year, sales increases at Satellites and Strategic & Defensive Missile Systems (S&DMS) more than offset declines at Space Transportation. In Satellites, an increase of $354 million was mainly driven by higher volume in government satellite activities, while commercial satellites sales remained relatively flat. There were four commercial satellite deliveries during 2007 and five in 2006. Higher volume in strategic missile programs accounted for the majority of a $225 million increase in sales at S&DMS. Space Transportation sales declined $290 million. This decline was expected given the divestiture of the International Launch Services business and the formation of the ULA joint venture in the fourth quarter of 2006. The Corporation no longer records sales on Atlas launch vehicles and related support to the U.S. Government, as ULA is accounted for under the equity method of accounting. This sales decline was offset partially by higher volume on the Orion program. Net sales for Space Systems increased by 16% in 2006 compared to 2005. During the year, sales growth in Satellites and S&DMS offset declines in Space Transportation. The $1.1 billion growth in Satellites sales was mainly due to higher volume 48 Table of Contents on both government and commercial satellite programs. There were five commercial satellite deliveries in 2006 compared to no deliveries in 2005. Higher volume in both strategic missile programs accounted for the $114 million sales increase at S&DMS. In Space Transportation, sales declined $102 million primarily due to lower volume in government space transportation activities on the Titan and External Tank programs. Increased sales on the Atlas Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle Launch capabilities (ELC) contract partially offset the lower government space transportation sales. Operating profit for the segment increased 15% in 2007 compared to 2006. During the year, operating profit growth in Satellites and S&DMS more than offset declines at Space Transportation. Satellites operating profit increased $90 million due to improved performance in commercial and government satellite activities. Increased operating profit of $33 million at S&DMS was due to higher volume and improved performance on strategic missile programs. In Space Transportation, the decline of $18 million in 2007 operating profit from 2006 was mainly due to a charge recognized by ULA in the third quarter of 2007 for an asset impairment on Delta II medium lift launch vehicles. The decline also reflects benefits recognized in 2006 from risk reduction activities, including the definitization of the ELC contract, and other performance improvements on the Atlas program, with no similar items recognized in the comparable period in 2007. Operating profit for the segment increased 23% in 2006 compared to 2005. Operating profit increased in Satellites, Space Transportation and S&DMS. The $69 million growth in Satellites operating profit was primarily driven by the volume and performance on government satellite programs and commercial satellite deliveries. In Space Transportation the $44 million growth in operating profit was attributable to improved performance on the Atlas program resulting from risk reduction activities, including the first quarter definitization of the ELC contract. In S&DMS, the $26 million increase was attributable to higher volume on strategic missile programs. Under the agreement to sell our ownership interests in LKEI and ILS in the fourth quarter of 2006, we continued to be responsible to refund customer advances to certain customers if launch services are not provided and ILS does not refund the advance. We expect to recognize the $67 million deferred net gain on the transaction when our responsibility to refund the advances expires, which we generally believe will be in 2008 based on the expected Proton launch schedule, which is subject to change. Our ability to realize the deferred net gain is dependent upon Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center (Khrunichev) providing the contracted launch services or, in the event the launch services are not provided, ILS ability to refund the advance. Our Balance Sheet at December 31, 2007 included current assets relating to LKEI and ILS totaling $132 million and current liabilities totaling $189 million, both of which will be reduced as the launch services are provided. The assets primarily relate to advances we have made to Khrunichev, the manufacturer of the launch vehicles and provider of the launch services, for future launches, and the liabilities relate primarily to advances we have received from customers for future launches. Any potential earnings impact resulting from our inability to realize the assets related to LKEI and ILS would be partially mitigated by our not recognizing the $67 million deferred net gain on the transaction. The decrease in backlog during 2007 as compared to 2006 was mainly due to sales volume related to government and commercial satellite programs, which more than offset increased orders on strategic missile programs. Unallocated Corporate Income (Expense), Net The following table shows the components of Unallocated Corporate income (expense), net. (In millions) 2007 2006 2005 FAS/CAS pension adjustment $ (58 ) $ (275 ) $ (626 ) Items not considered in segment operating performance 71 230 173 Stock compensation expense (149 ) (111 ) Other, net (28 ) (105 ) (115 ) $ (164 ) $ (261 ) $ (568 ) The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension expense calculated in accordance with FAS 87 and pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS. Because the CAS expense is recovered through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore recognized in a particular segment Net sales and Cost of sales, the results of operations of our segments only include pension expense as determined and funded in accordance with CAS rules. Accordingly, the FAS/CAS adjustment is not included in segment operating results and therefore is included in the reconciliation of total segment Operating profit to consolidated Operating profit under GAAP. 49 Table of Contents The following table shows the CAS funding that is included as expense in the segments operating results, the related FAS expense, and the resulting FAS/CAS pension adjustment: (In millions) 2007 2006 2005 FAS 87 expense $ (687 ) $ (938 ) $ (1,124 ) Less: CAS expense and funding (629 ) (663 ) (498 ) FAS/CAS pension adjustment expense $ (58 ) $ (275 ) $ (626 ) The FAS 87 expense decreased in 2007 due to an increase in the discount rate and other factors such as the effects of the actual return on plan assets. FAS 87 expense decreased in 2006 primarily due to the reduction in the rate of future compensation increases as well as the growth in plan assets in 2006, including contributions we made to the pension trust. CAS are a major factor in determining our pension funding requirements and govern the extent to which our pension costs are allocable to and recoverable under contracts with the U.S. Government. The total funding requirement for pension plans under CAS in 2007 was $629 million, which was recorded in our segment results of operations. That amount was funded through discretionary prepayments we made to the plans in 2006. For 2008, we expect our funding requirements and expense under CAS to decrease. Also in 2008, funding in addition to the amount calculated under CAS will likely be required under Internal Revenue Code (IRC) rules. Any additional amounts computed under the IRC rules are considered to be prepayments under the CAS rules, and are recorded on our Balance Sheet and recovered in future periods. In 2007, 2006 and 2005, we made discretionary prepayments of $335 million, $594 million and $980 million to the pension trust. Prepayments reduce the amount of future cash funding that will be required under the CAS and IRC rules and, as a result, we expect to have no required cash contributions to the pension trust in 2008. Certain items are excluded from segment results as part of senior management evaluation of segment operating performance consistent with the management approach permitted by FAS 131, Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information . For example, gains and losses related to the disposition of businesses or investments managed by Corporate, as well as certain other Corporate activities, are not considered by management in evaluating the operating performance of business segments. Therefore, for purposes of segment reporting, the following items were included in Unallocated Corporate income (expense), net for 2007, 2006 and 2005: (In millions, except per share data) Operating Profit (Loss) Net Earnings (Loss) Earnings (Loss) Per Share Year ended December 31, 2007 Gain on sale of interest in Comsat International $ 25 $ 16 $ 0.04 Gain on sale of land in California 25 16 0.04 Earnings from reversal of legal reserves due to settlement 21 14 0.03 $ 71 $ 46 $ 0.11 Year ended December 31, 2006 Gain on sale of interest in Inmarsat $ 127 $ 83 $ 0.19 Gains on sale of land 51 33 0.08 Earnings from expiration of AES transaction indemnification 29 19 0.04 Gain on sale of Space Imaging assets 23 15 0.03 $ 230 $ 150 $ 0.34 Year ended December 31, 2005 Gains related to Inmarsat transactions $ 126 $ 82 $ 0.18 Gain on sale of interest in Intelsat 47 31 0.07 Gain on sale of interest in NeuStar 30 19 0.04 Impairment charge related to a satellite (30 ) (19 ) (0.04 ) $ 173 $ 113 $ 0.25 The change in the Other, net component of Unallocated Corporate income (expense), net from 2006 to 2007 and from 2005 to 2006 primarily was due to lower expense associated with a number of corporate activities. 50 Table of Contents Liquidity and Cash Flows We have a balanced cash deployment and disciplined growth strategy to enhance shareholder value and position ourselves to take advantage of new business opportunities when they arise. Consistent with that strategy, we have invested in our business ( e.g. , capital expenditures, independent research and development), made selective acquisitions of businesses, repurchased shares, increased our dividends and opportunistically reduced and refinanced our debt. The following provides an overview of our execution of this strategy. Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities (In millions) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $458 million to $4.2 billion in 2007 as compared to 2006. In 2007, the increase was primarily attributable to an increase in net earnings of $504 million and lower postretirement benefit plan contributions of $399 million as compared to 2006. This increase was offset partially by a $309 million decrease in cash provided by operating working capital and higher net tax payments of $272 million compared to 2006. Operating working capital accounts consist of Receivables, Inventories, Accounts payable, and Customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred. Net cash provided by operating activities was $3.8 billion in 2006, an increase of $589 million compared to 2005. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in Net earnings of $704 million, and also to an increase in operating working capital improvements of $150 million compared to 2005. The remaining change in cash between the periods was due to income tax payments, postretirement benefit plan contributions, and the timing of various other operating activities. Investing Activities Capital expenditures Capital expenditures for Property, plant and equipment amounted to $940 million in 2007, $893 million in 2006 and $865 million in 2005. We expect our capital expenditures over the next three years to exceed 2007 expenditures consistent with the expected growth in our business and to support specific program requirements. Acquisitions, divestitures and other activities We have a process to selectively identify businesses for acquisition that meet our strategic, operational and financial targets, help build a balanced portfolio and provide disciplined growth. As disclosed under the caption Acquisition and Divestiture Activities, we paid $337 million, including amounts related to acquisitions completed in prior years, for the acquisition of businesses and joint venture activities in 2007, compared with $1,122 million in 2006 and $564 million in 2005. In 2007, we received proceeds of $26 million from the sale of our remaining interest in Comsat International. During 2006, we received proceeds of $132 million from the sale of our remaining shares in Inmarsat, $24 million from the sale of assets of Space Imaging, LLC, and $24 million from the sale of Lockheed Martin Intersputnik. During 2005, we received proceeds of $935 million from the divestiture of non-core equity investments, including $752 million from the sale of our investment in Intelsat, Ltd., $140 million from the sale of Inmarsat shares and the redemption of certain Inmarsat equity-related investments, and $33 million from the sale of our NeuStar investment. 51 Table of Contents Financing Activities Share issuances, repurchases and dividends Cash received from the issuance of our common stock during the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005 totaled $350 million, $627 million and $406 million. Those activities resulted in the issuance of 7.1 million shares, 13.6 million shares and 9.7 million shares during the respective periods. During 2007, 2006 and 2005, we used cash of $2,127 million, $2,115 million and $1,310 million for common share repurchase activity (see Note 10). Our share repurchase program authorizes the repurchase of up to 128 million shares of our common stock from time-to-time at management discretion, including 20 million of additional shares our Board authorized for repurchase in 2007. As of December 31, 2007, we had repurchased a total of 95.3 million shares under the program, and there remained approximately 32.7 million shares that may be repurchased in the future. The payment of dividends on our common shares is one of the key components of our balanced cash deployment strategy. Shareholders were paid cash dividends of $615 million in 2007, $538 million in 2006 and $462 million in 2005. We have increased our quarterly dividend rate in each of the last three years. We declared quarterly dividends: in 2007 of $0.35 per share during each of the first three quarters and $0.42 per share for the last quarter; in 2006 of $0.30 per share during each of the first three quarters and $0.35 per share for the last quarter; and in 2005 of $0.25 per share during each of the first three quarters and $0.30 per share for the last quarter. Issuance and repayment of Long-term debt Cash provided from operations has been our principal source of funds to reduce our Long-term debt. In 2007, we repaid $32 million of Long-term debt based on scheduled maturities. During 2006, we paid $353 million to complete an exchange of debt and $210 million related to scheduled debt repayments. In 2005, we used $145 million of cash for the early retirement and scheduled repayment of Long-term debt. Capital Structure and Resources At December 31, 2007, we held Cash and cash equivalents of approximately $2.6 billion and Short-term investments of $333 million. Our Long-term debt, net of unamortized discounts, amounted to $4.4 billion. Our Long-term debt is mainly in the form of publicly issued notes and debentures. We have $1.0 billion of convertible debentures that have a floating interest rate based on LIBOR; however, at December 31, 2007, we had an agreement in place to swap variable interest rates on the debentures for a fixed interest rate. With this swap agreement, our entire Long-term debt portfolio effectively bears interest at fixed rates. In the fourth quarter of 2007, the price of our common stock exceeded 130% of the $73.25 conversion price on our $1.0 billion of convertible debentures for the specified period of time, and therefore holders of the debentures may elect to convert them during the quarter ending March 31, 2008 (see Note 7). The right to convert the debentures based on our stock price is re-evaluated each quarter. We have irrevocably agreed to pay only cash in lieu of common stock for the accreted principal amount of the debentures relative to our conversion obligations, but have retained the right to satisfy the conversion obligations in excess of the accreted principal amount in cash or common stock. The conversion obligation in excess of the accreted principal amount at December 31, 2007 totaled approximately $437 million. If that amount had been settled in shares on that date, we would have been required to issue 4.2 million shares of our common stock. We have the right to redeem any or all of the debentures at any time after August 15, 2008. We also have outstanding $300 million of 40-year debentures issued in 1996 that bear interest of 7.20%, the registered holders of which may elect, between March 1 and April 1, 2008, to have their debentures repaid on May 1, 2008. We have continued to classify these debentures and the $1.0 billion of convertible debentures discussed above as long-term based on our ability and intent to maintain the debt outstanding for at least one year. Our ability to do so is demonstrated by our $1.5 billion revolving credit facility which expires in June 2012 (see discussion below). There were no borrowings outstanding under the credit facility on December 31, 2007. In August 2006, we issued $1.1 billion of new 6.15% Notes due 2036 (the New Notes). The New Notes were issued in exchange for certain other of our then outstanding debt securities, and cash consideration of $343 million. Holders also received a cash payment representing accrued and unpaid interest on the previous notes. The cash consideration of $343 million, which is included in the Statement of Cash Flows in financing activities, is being amortized over the life of the New Notes as a discount using the effective interest method and recorded in interest expense. The New Notes are included on our Balance Sheet net of the unamortized discount under the caption Long-term debt, net. The expenses associated with the exchange, net of state income tax benefits, totaled $16 million and were recorded in Other non-operating income (expense), net. They reduced Net earnings in 2006 by $11 million ($0.03 per share). 52 Table of Contents Our Stockholders equity amounted to $9.8 billion at December 31, 2007, an increase of $2.9 billion from December 31, 2006. The increase was due primarily to Net earnings of $3.0 billion, the remeasurement and recognition of prior period amounts related to our postretirement benefit plans under FAS 158 (see Note 12), which increased Other comprehensive income by $1.7 billion, and employee stock activity of $889 million. These increases were partially offset by the repurchase of 21.6 million common shares for $2.1 billion and payment of $615 million of dividends during the year. As we repurchase our common shares, we reduce Common stock for the $1 of par value of the shares repurchased, with the remainder of the purchase price over par value recorded as a reduction of Additional paid-in capital. Due to the volume of repurchases made under our share repurchase program, Additional paid-in capital was reduced to zero, with the remainder of the excess of purchase price over par value of $471 million recorded as a reduction of Retained earnings. Through our debt repayment activities, our Long-term debt balance has declined $3.2 billion over the last five years from $7.6 billion at December 31, 2002. Our debt-to-total capitalization ratio was 31% at December 31, 2007, down from 39% at December 31, 2006. The decrease from 2006 to 2007 was primarily attributable to the increase in Stockholders equity discussed above. Debt-to-Total Capital Ratio Return on invested capital (ROIC) improved by 220 basis points during 2007 to 21.4%. We define ROIC as Net earnings plus after-tax interest expense divided by average invested capital (Stockholders equity plus debt), after adjusting Stockholders equity by adding back amounts related to postretirement benefit plans, including unrecognized prior service costs, unrecognized actuarial gains and losses, the adjustment for the adoption of FAS 158 in 2006 and minimum pension liability adjustments recorded in prior years. We believe that reporting ROIC provides investors with greater visibility into how effectively we use the capital invested in our operations. We use ROIC to evaluate multi-year investment decisions and as a long-term performance measure. We also use ROIC as a factor in evaluating management performance under certain of our incentive compensation plans. ROIC is not a measure of financial performance under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, and may not be defined and calculated by other companies in the same manner. ROIC should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to Net earnings as an indicator of performance. See Consolidated Financial Data Five Year Summary on page 30 of this Form 10-K for additional information concerning how we calculate ROIC. Return On Invested Capital Ratio At December 31, 2007, we had in place a $1.5 billion revolving credit facility which expires in June 2012. There were no borrowings outstanding under the facility at December 31, 2007. Borrowings under the credit facility would be unsecured 53 Table of Contents and bear interest at rates based, at our option, on the Eurodollar rate or a bank Base Rate (as defined). Each bank obligation to make loans under the credit facility is subject to, among other things, our compliance with various representations, warranties and covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets, and a covenant not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio. We have agreements in place with banking institutions to provide for the issuance of commercial paper. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding at December 31, 2007. If we were to issue commercial paper, the borrowings would be supported by the $1.5 billion credit facility. We have an effective shelf registration statement on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission to provide for the issuance of up to $1 billion in debt securities. If we were to issue debt under this shelf registration, we would expect to use the net proceeds for general corporate purposes. These purposes may include repayment of debt, working capital needs, capital expenditures, acquisitions and any other general corporate purpose. We actively seek to finance our business in a manner that preserves financial flexibility while minimizing borrowing costs to the extent practicable. Our management continually reviews changes in financial, market and economic conditions to manage the types, amounts and maturities of our indebtedness. We may at times refinance existing indebtedness, vary our mix of variable-rate and fixed-rate debt, or seek alternative financing sources for our cash and operational needs. Cash and cash equivalents, Short-term investments, cash flow from operations and other available financing resources are expected to be sufficient to meet anticipated operating, capital expenditure and debt service requirements, as well as acquisition and other discretionary investment needs, projected over the next three years. Contractual Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements At December 31, 2007, we had contractual commitments to repay debt, make payments under operating leases, settle obligations related to agreements to purchase goods and services, and settle tax and other liabilities. Capital lease obligations were negligible. Payments due under these obligations and commitments are as follows: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term debt (a) $ 4,749 $ 104 $ 243 $ 2 $ 4,400 Interest payments (b) 4,945 308 512 492 3,633 Other liabilities 1,694 197 523 202 772 Operating lease obligations 1,104 295 419 268 122 Purchase obligations: Operating activities 26,051 15,309 9,432 1,017 293 Capital expenditures 256 242 11 1 2 Total contractual cash obligations $ 38,799 $ 16,455 $ 11,140 $ 1,982 $ 9,222 (a) The total amount of Long-term debt excludes unamortized discounts of $342 million (see Note 7). (b) Interest payments include amounts for debt outstanding through maturity except for our $1 billion of convertible debentures, for which we have included payments through August 15, 2008. Subsequent to that date, interest is no longer payable to holders, but rather will be included in the accreted principal of the debentures (see Note 7). Long-term debt includes scheduled principal payments only. Generally, our Long-term debt obligations are subject to, along with other things, compliance with certain covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets. Amounts related to Other liabilities represent the contractual obligations for certain long-term liabilities recorded as of December 31, 2007. Such amounts mainly include expected payments under deferred compensation plans, non-qualified pension plans, environmental liabilities and business acquisition agreements. Obligations related to environmental liabilities represent our estimate of remediation payment obligations under government consent decrees and agreements, excluding amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Government in its capacity as a potentially responsible party. The amounts also include liabilities related to tax positions we have taken for which we have recorded liabilities in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes (see Notes 1 and 8). We estimated the timing of payments based on the expected completion of the related examinations by the applicable taxing authorities. 54 Table of Contents Purchase obligations related to operating activities include agreements and requirements contracts that give the supplier recourse to us for cancellation or nonperformance under the contract or contain terms that would subject us to liquidated damages. Such agreements and contracts may, for example, be related to direct materials, obligations to subcontractors and outsourcing arrangements. Total purchase obligations in the preceding table include approximately $25 billion related to contractual commitments entered into as a result of contracts we have with our U.S. Government customers. However, the U.S. Government would generally be required to pay us for any costs we incur relative to these commitments if they were to terminate the related contracts for convenience pursuant to the FAR. For example, if we had commitments to purchase goods and services that were entered into as a result of a specific contract we received from our U.S. Government customer and the customer terminated the contract for its convenience, any amounts we would be required to pay to settle the related commitments, as well as amounts previously incurred, would generally be reimbursed by the customer. This would also be true in cases where we perform subcontract work for a prime contractor under a U.S. Government contract. The termination for convenience language may also be included in contracts with foreign, state and local governments. We also have contracts with customers that do not include termination for convenience provisions, including contracts with commercial customers. Purchase obligations in the preceding table for capital expenditures generally include amounts for facilities and equipment at several of our locations, related to customer contracts. We also may enter into industrial participation agreements, sometimes referred to as offset agreements, as a condition to obtaining orders for our products and services from certain customers in foreign countries. These agreements are designed to enhance the social and economic environment of the foreign country by requiring the contractor to promote investment in the country. Offset agreements may be satisfied through activities that do not require us to use cash, including transferring technology, providing manufacturing and other consulting support to in-country projects, and the purchase by third parties ( e.g., our vendors) of supplies from in-country vendors. These agreements may also be satisfied through our use of cash for such activities as purchasing supplies from in-country vendors, providing financial support for in-country projects, and building or leasing facilities for in-country operations. We do not commit to offset agreements until orders for our products or services are definitive. Offset programs generally extend over several years and may provide for penalties in the event we fail to perform in accordance with offset requirements. We have not been required to pay any such penalties. The amounts ultimately applied against our offset agreements are based on negotiations with the customer and generally require cash outlays that represent only a fraction of the original amount in the offset agreement. At December 31, 2007, we had outstanding offset agreements totaling $8.9 billion, primarily related to our Aeronautics segment, that extend through 2020. To the extent we have entered into purchase obligations at December 31, 2007 that also satisfy offset agreements, those amounts are included in the preceding table. In connection with the formation of ULA, we and Boeing each committed to provide up to $25 million in additional capital contributions and $200 million in other financial support to ULA, as required. The non-capital financial support was required to be made in the form of a revolving credit facility between us and ULA or guarantees of ULA financing with third parties, in either case, to the extent necessary for ULA to meet its working capital needs. We agreed to provide this support for at least five years from December 1, 2006, the closing date of the transaction, and would expect to fund our requirements with cash on hand. To satisfy our non-capital financial support commitment, we and Boeing have put into place a revolving credit agreement with ULA. At December 31, 2007, we had made $3 million in payments under our capital contribution commitment, and no amounts have been drawn on the revolving credit agreement. In addition, both we and Boeing have cross-indemnified each other related to certain financial support arrangements ( e.g. , letters of credit, surety bonds or foreign exchange contracts provided by either party) and guarantees by us and Boeing of the performance and financial obligations of ULA under certain of its launch service contracts. We believe ULA will be able to fully perform its obligations, as it has done through December 31, 2007, and that it will not be necessary to make payments under the cross-indemnities. 55 Table of Contents We have entered into standby letter of credit agreements and other arrangements with financial institutions and customers mainly relating to advances received from customers and/or the guarantee of future performance on some of our contracts. In some cases, we may also guarantee the contractual performance of third parties. At December 31, 2007, we had outstanding letters of credit, surety bonds and guarantees, as follows: Commitment Expiration By Period (In millions) Total Commitment Less Than 1 Year (a) 1-3 Years (a) 3-5 Years After 5 Years Standby letters of credit $ 2,873 $ 2,651 $ 169 $ 45 $ 8 Surety bonds 423 378 45 Guarantees 32 1 30 1 Total commitments $ 3,328 $ 3,030 $ 244 $ 46 $ 8 (a) Approximately $2,299 million, $36 million and $23 million of standby letters of credit in the Less Than 1 Year, 1-3 Year, and 3-5 Year periods, and approximately $44 million and $3 million of surety bonds in the Less Than 1 Year and 1-3 Year periods, are expected to renew for additional periods until completion of the contractual obligation. Included in the table above is approximately $375 million representing letter of credit and surety bond amounts for which related obligations or liabilities are also recorded on the Balance Sheet, either as reductions of Inventories, as Customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred, or as Other liabilities. Approximately $2.0 billion of the standby letters of credit in the table above were issued to secure advance payments received under an F-16 contract from an international customer. These letters of credit are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance, and the amount available will be reduced as certain events occur throughout the period of performance in accordance with the contract terms. Similar to the letters of credit for the F-16 contract, other letters of credit and surety bonds are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance. Under the agreement to sell our ownership interests in LKEI and ILS (see Note 2), we will continue to be responsible to refund customer advances to certain customers if launch services are not provided and ILS does not refund the advance. We expect to recognize the $67 million deferred net gain on the transaction when our responsibility to refund the advances expires, which we currently believe will be in 2008 based on the expected Proton launch schedule, which is subject to change. The amount we could be required to pay is expected to increase over time due to the payment of additional advances by the customers to ILS related to the specific launches we have guaranteed, and will be reduced by the occurrence of those launches. At December 31, 2007, the total amount that could be payable under the guarantees, approximating the total contract value of the guaranteed launches, was $174 million. That amount may be partially mitigated by approximately $57 million of cash we retained that, absent any requirements to make payments under the guarantees, will be paid to the buyer over time as the launches occur. Through December 31, 2007, Proton launch services provided through ILS were provided according to contract terms. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure of Market Risk Our main exposure to market risk relates to interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. Our financial instruments that are subject to interest rate risk principally include fixed-rate and floating-rate long-term debt. At December 31, 2007, we had an agreement in place to swap variable interest rates on our $1.0 billion of convertible debentures based on LIBOR for a fixed interest rate through August 15, 2008. With this swap agreement, our Long-term debt portfolio effectively bears interest at fixed rates. We have designated the agreement as a cash flow hedge of the forecasted LIBOR-based variable interest payments. Based on our evaluation at the inception of the hedging agreement and in subsequent periods, we expect the hedging relationship to be highly effective in achieving the offsetting cash flows attributable to the hedged variable interest payments, resulting in a fixed net interest expense reported on the Statement of Earnings. We determined that the hedging relationship remained highly effective at December 31, 2007. The fair value of the interest rate swap agreement is adjusted at each Balance Sheet date, with a corresponding adjustment to Other comprehensive income (loss). At December 31, 2007, the fair value of the interest rate swap agreement was not material. We use forward foreign exchange contracts to manage our exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, and generally do so in ways that qualify for hedge accounting treatment. These exchange contracts hedge the fluctuations in cash flows associated with firm commitments or specific anticipated transactions contracted in foreign currencies, or hedge the exposure to rate changes affecting foreign currency denominated assets or liabilities. Related gains and losses on these contracts, to the extent they are effective hedges, are recognized in income at the same time the hedged transaction is recognized or when the hedged asset or liability is adjusted. To the extent the hedges are ineffective, gains and losses on the 56 Table of Contents contracts are recognized in the current period. At December 31, 2007, the fair value of forward exchange contracts outstanding and the amounts of gains and losses recorded during the year then ended were not material. We evaluate the credit quality of potential counterparties to derivative transactions and only enter into agreements with those deemed to have minimal credit risk. We periodically monitor changes to counterparty credit quality as well as our concentration of credit exposure to individual counterparties. We do not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes. New Accounting Pronouncements In December 2007, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (FAS) 141(R), Business Combinations , which will become effective January 1, 2009. The new standard will replace existing guidance and significantly change accounting and reporting relative to business combinations in consolidated financial statements, including requirements to recognize acquisition-related transaction and post acquisition restructuring costs in our results of operations as incurred. FAS 141(R) will be effective for businesses acquired after the effective date. In September 2006, the FASB issued FAS 157, Fair Value Measurements , which is effective January 1, 2008, with the exception of leases and certain nonfinancial assets and liabilities. FAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a market-based framework or hierarchy for measuring fair value and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. The new standard generally is applicable whenever another accounting pronouncement requires or permits assets and liabilities to be measured at fair value. We currently do not expect that the adoption of FAS 157 will have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In February 2007, the FASB issued FAS 159, The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities Including an Amendment of FASB Statement No. 115 , which also becomes effective January 1, 2008. Under FAS 159, a company may choose to measure certain financial instruments ( e.g. , assets and liabilities) and certain other items not currently subject to fair value measurement at fair value. If so elected, any unrealized gains and losses from marking those items to market will be included in earnings in each subsequent reporting period. The fair value option may be elected on an instrument-by-instrument basis, with few exceptions. We do not plan to elect the fair value option. In September 2007, the FASB issued a proposed rule that would change the accounting for our $1 billion of floating rate convertible debentures. The effect of the rule, if enacted as proposed, requires the proceeds from the debt issuance to be bifurcated between a debt and equity component as of the August 2003 issuance date. The equity component reflects the value of the conversion feature. The FASB currently plans to re-deliberate the proposal in the first quarter of 2008 and has not indicated when it may become effective. If approved as currently drafted, we would expect the proposed rule to result in immaterial changes to our previously reported Balance Sheets and Statements of Earnings to reflect the amortization of additional interest expense over the period from August 2003 to August 2008. Controls and Procedures We maintain disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, which are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our periodic filings with the SEC is reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules and forms, and to provide reasonable assurance that assets are safeguarded and transactions are properly executed and recorded. Our disclosure controls and procedures are also designed to ensure that information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO), as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. In designing and evaluating such controls and procedures, we recognize that any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives, and management necessarily is required to use its judgment in evaluating the cost-benefit relationship of possible controls and procedures. Also, we have investments in certain unconsolidated entities. As we do not control or manage these entities, our controls and procedures with respect to those entities are necessarily substantially more limited (in some cases, only that of a passive equity holder) than those we maintain with respect to our consolidated subsidiaries. We routinely review our system of internal control over financial reporting and make changes to our processes and systems to improve controls and increase efficiency, while ensuring that we maintain an effective internal control environment. Changes may include such activities as implementing new, more efficient systems, consolidating the activities of two or more business units, and migrating certain processes to our Shared Services centers. In addition, when we acquire new businesses, we review the controls and procedures of the acquired business as part of our integration activities. 57 Table of Contents We performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, as of December 31, 2007. The evaluation was performed with the participation of senior management of each business segment and key Corporate functions, and under the supervision of the CEO and CFO. Based on our evaluation, we concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of December 31, 2007. During 2007, we also performed a separate evaluation of our internal control over financial reporting in accordance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, including performing self-assessment and monitoring procedures. Based on those activities and other evaluation procedures, our management, including the CEO and CFO, concluded that internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2007. Management report on our financial statements and internal control over financial reporting appears on page 59. In addition, the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting was audited by our independent registered public accounting firm. Their report appears on page 60. There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the most recently completed fiscal quarter that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 
