CIK: 936468
Company Name: LOCKHEED MARTIN CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-02-25


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Management Overview Lockheed Martin is a global security company that principally is engaged in the research, design, development, manufacture, integration, and sustainment of advanced technology systems and products. We provide a broad range of management, engineering, technical, scientific, logistic, and information services. We serve both domestic and international customers with products and services that have defense, civil, and commercial applications, with our principal customers being agencies of the U.S. Government. In 2010, 84% of our $45.8 billion in net sales were made to the U.S. Government. Approximately 60% of our net sales were made to the Department of Defense (DoD), with approximately 24% attributable to non-DoD agencies. Sales to foreign governments (including foreign military sales funded, in whole or in part, by the U.S. Government) amounted to 15% of net sales in 2010. The remainder of our net sales was attributable to commercial and other customers. Our main areas of focus are in defense, space, intelligence, homeland security, and government information technology. We operate in four principal business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, Information Systems & Global Solutions (IS&GS), and Space Systems. We organize our business segments based on the nature of the products and services offered. We are operating in an environment that is characterized by both increasing complexity in the global security environment, as well as continuing economic pressures in the United States and globally. A significant component of our strategy in this environment is to focus on core program execution, improving the quality and predictability of the delivery of our products and services, and placing more security capability into the hands of our customers at affordable prices. We also are focused on cost reduction, through programs like our recent Voluntary Executive Separation Program (VESP) and facility reduction initiatives, to further enhance the affordability of our products and services. While we expect our sales to increase in the low single digits for 2011, growth rates are slowing for our company and across the industry as compared to prior years as our customers are preparing to meet new security challenges without the benefit of increased resources in any given fiscal year. We expect our segment operating profit for 2011 to be consistent with 2010 as margins face pressure in this environment. Despite the challenges we face, we expect to generate strong operating cash flows, which allows us to continue to invest in technologies to fulfill new mission requirements for our customers, invest in our people so that we have the professional and leadership skills necessary to be successful in this environment, and return at least 50% of free cash flow 1 to investors in the form of share repurchases and dividends. Industry Considerations U.S. Government Business Budget Priorities The U.S. Government continues to focus on developing and implementing spending, tax, and other initiatives to stimulate the economy, create jobs, and reduce the deficit. The Administration is attempting to balance decisions regarding defense, homeland security, and other federal spending priorities with the cost of these initiatives and increased deficit spending, particularly in the longer term. Although some specific priorities and initiatives may change from year to year, the investments and acquisitions we have made have been focused on aligning our businesses to address what we believe are the most critical national priorities and mission areas. The possibility remains, however, that one or more of our programs could be reduced, extended, or terminated as a result of the Administration continuing assessment of priorities. The Administration spending priorities were released on February 14, 2011 with the submission of the President Budget Request for fiscal year 2012. Every year, Congress must approve or revise the proposals contained in the President annual budget request through enactment of appropriations bills and other policy legislation, which then require final Presidential approval. The outcome of the federal budget process has a direct effect on our business. 1 We define free cash flow as cash from operations as determined under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), less the amount identified as expenditures for property, plant and equipment as presented on our Statements of Cash Flows. 23 Table of Contents Department of Defense Business The DoD base budget has seen consistent growth over the past ten years, enabling it to grow from $300 billion at the start of the last decade to $553 billion in the President baseline budget request for fiscal year 2012. The fiscal year 2012 request represents nominal growth of 5.1% over the fiscal year 2011 baseline budget of $526 billion. This 2011 baseline budget assumes that the continuing resolution currently in place (see discussion below) is extended through the end of fiscal year 2011. Preliminary insights into national security funding priorities for fiscal year 2012 and beyond were revealed on January 6, 2011 by Secretary of Defense Robert Gates. Specifically, his defense spending proposal reflected a slight increase in nominal growth over the next few years. To date, Congress has funded U.S. military operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, and other unforeseeable contingency or peacekeeping operations, through a separate Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO) funding outside of the base DoD budget. The OCO funding for fiscal year 2011 totaled $159 billion, and the Administration requested $118 billion in fiscal year 2012. Our sales historically have not been significantly dependent on overseas contingency or supplemental funding requests, and therefore we continue to focus our attention on the DoD base budget for support and funding of our programs. In December 2010, Congress passed a continuing resolution funding measure for fiscal year 2011 to finance all U.S. Government activities through March 4, 2011. Under this continuing resolution, partial-year funding at amounts consistent with appropriated levels for fiscal year 2010 are available, subject to certain restrictions, but new spending initiatives are not authorized. Our key programs continue to be supported and funded despite the continuing resolution financing mechanism. However, during periods covered by continuing resolutions (or until the regular appropriation bills are passed), we may experience delays in procurement of products and services due to lack of funding, and those delays may affect our sales and profit during the period. The current continuing resolution has not had a material effect on our results of operations, financial position, or cash flows. The arrival of a new Congress in January 2011 with the House of Representatives and Senate under control of different political parties creates the potential for some uncertainty as to whether the government will continue to operate under a continuing resolution for the remainder of the fiscal year or will be able to enact appropriations legislation. We believe our broad mix of programs and capabilities continues to position us favorably to support the current and future needs of the DoD. As the DoD increases its emphasis on affordability in the current fiscal environment and continues to respond to the increasingly complex and dynamic global security environment, many of our products remain well-positioned to meet the needs of the military services. For example, while Secretary Gates proposed changes to our F-35 program which will affect the aircraft development and transition to production (see the F-35 discussion under the caption Other Business Considerations in this section), the aircraft remains a national priority. Additionally, the U.S. Navy plans to evolve the Aegis air and missile defense system through modernization programs to derive maximum utility over the long service lives of these systems. The Navy also recently decided to procure up to ten additional Littoral Combat Ships from us over the next five years. The need for more affordable logistics and sustainment, expansive use of information technology and knowledge-based solutions, and vastly improved levels of network and cybersecurity, all appear to continue to be national priorities. To address these priorities, we have been growing our portfolio in these areas, diversifying our business, and expanding into adjacent businesses and programs that include surface naval vessels, rotary wing aviation, and land vehicles. We have expanded production of the C-130J Super Hercules tactical airlifter to meet the needs of the U.S. Government and international customers. Despite recent proposed changes, we continue to prepare for increased production of the F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter for the U.S. Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps, and international partners in future years. This program continues to be a significant element of a broader U.S. effort to build the capacity of alliance partners throughout the world. In the areas of space-based intelligence and information superiority, we are the prime contractor on programs such as the Global Positioning Satellite program, Mobile User Objective System, the Advanced Extremely High Frequency system, the Space-Based Infrared System-High, and classified programs. Our products are represented in almost every aspect of land, sea, air, and space-based missile defense, including the Aegis, the Patriot Advanced Capability (PAC) missile program, and the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) transportable defensive missile system. We continue to perform on contracts to develop and deliver essential munitions, missile, and other systems, such as Hellfire, Guided Multiple Launch Rocket Systems, and EQ-36 radar systems. We also have unmanned systems capabilities, including air, ground, and underwater systems. 24 Table of Contents In the area of command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR) programs, our capabilities include the Airborne Maritime Fixed Joint Tactical Radio System, the Warfighter Information Network Tactical, the Combatant Commanders Integrated Command and Control System, and the Global Communications Support System Air Force. We have a significant presence in the support and modernization of the DoD information technology systems. We see opportunities for expansion of our sustainment and logistical support activities to enhance the longevity and cost-effectiveness of the systems procured by our customers, and for improving global supply chain management. Non-Department of Defense Business Our experience in the defense arena, together with our core information technology and services expertise, has enabled us to provide products and services to a number of government agencies, including the Departments of Homeland Security, Justice, Commerce, Health and Human Services, Transportation, and Energy, the U.S. Postal Service, the Social Security Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the National Archives, and the Library of Congress. All non-defense agencies also are operating under a continuing resolution that requires them to remain at fiscal year 2010 funding levels. In addition, the President budget proposes a three-year freeze in certain civil agency budgets, including agencies to which we provide products and services. We believe our key programs will continue to be supported in the budgets of the various agencies with which we do business. We have continued to expand our capabilities in critical intelligence, knowledge management, and e-Government solutions for our customers, including the Social Security Administration and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). We also provide program management, business strategy and consulting, complex systems development and maintenance, complete life-cycle software support, information assurance, and enterprise solutions. In the civil arena, as with our defense business, we have not seen a significant effect on our business from the Administration stated policy of in-sourcing. We believe that there will be continued demand by federal and civil government agencies for upgrading and investing in new information technology systems and solutions, but at a somewhat slower pace in the near term. Consistent with our DoD business, more affordable logistics and sustainment, a more expansive use of information technology and knowledge-based solutions, and improved levels of network and cybersecurity all appear to be priorities in our non-DoD business as well. Homeland security, critical infrastructure protection, and improved service levels for civil government agencies also appear to be high customer priorities. The continuing strong emphasis on homeland security may increase demand for our capabilities in areas such as air traffic management, ports, waterways and cargo security, biohazard detection systems for postal equipment, employee identification and credential verification systems, information systems security, and other global security systems solutions. Other Business Considerations International Business We remain committed to growth in our sales to international customers. We conduct business with foreign governments primarily through Aeronautics and Electronic Systems. Our international sales are composed of foreign military sales through the U.S. Government and direct commercial contracts. In Aeronautics, the U.S. Government and eight foreign government partners are working together on the design, testing, production, and sustainment of the F-35 Lightning II, while other countries such as Israel have recently selected the F-35 as their next generation combat aircraft. We expect international deliveries of the F-35 to begin in 2012. The F-16 Fighting Falcon has been selected by 25 countries, with 53 follow-on buys from 14 countries. We continue to expand the C-130J Super Hercules air mobility aircraft international footprint with customers in 15 countries including recent orders from Israel, Kuwait, Korea, and Tunisia. In global sustainment, we are leveraging our value as the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) for our major platforms and have set up new production capabilities to provide service life extension, including new wings and support for Norway P-3 fleet. We have also received awards from the U.S. and Canadian governments to upgrade their P-3 aircraft. With regard to the Aegis Weapon System, our Electronic Systems segment performs activities in the development, production, ship integration and test, and lifetime support for ships of international customers such as Japan, Spain, Korea, Norway, and Australia. The system also has been selected to be used as a ground-based missile defense system in Europe, referred to as Aegis Ashore. This segment has contracts with the Canadian Government for the upgrade and support of 25 Table of Contents combat systems on Halifax class frigates. The new Littoral Combat Ship is also generating interest from potential international customers. Electronic Systems also produces the PAC-3 missile, an advanced defensive missile designed to intercept incoming airborne threats, for international customers including Japan, Germany, the Netherlands, Taiwan, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). International customers have also expressed interest in our THAAD defensive missile system. To the extent our contracts and business arrangements with international partners include operations in foreign countries, other risks are introduced into our business, including changing economic conditions, fluctuations in relative currency values, regulation by foreign countries, and the potential for deterioration of political relations. Status of the F-35 Program The System Development and Demonstration (SDD) portion of the F-35 program has experienced schedule delays, work scope changes, and cost increases. In the second quarter of 2010, the DoD recertified the F-35 program after completing a legally required review of the program priority, capability, cost, and management structure in accordance with the Nunn-McCurdy process established under federal law. The Nunn-McCurdy process requires notification to the U.S. Congress if DoD program cost estimates exceed specified threshold levels, and includes a requirement that a program be terminated if cost estimates increase by 50% above the original program baseline, unless the DoD makes prescribed findings about the program. As part of that process, the DoD certified that continuation of the F-35 program is essential to national security, among other required findings. In connection with the recertification, the DoD tasked the F-35 program executive officer to complete a technical baseline review which addressed program requirements, schedule, and cost. On January 6, 2011, the Secretary of Defense outlined the recommendations of the technical baseline review. Those recommendations included adding funding to the F-35 development program and extending development through 2016. These funds are to be used for additional development scope, for testing and risk retirement activities to better position the program for production, and to correct prior estimates. The Secretary of Defense also identified the U.S. Air Force Conventional Take-off and Landing (CTOL) version and the Navy carrier version, which represent over 85 percent of the planned domestic production run, as proceeding satisfactorily in development. Testing challenges and delays on the short takeoff and vertical landing (STOVL) variant resulted in a decision to decouple STOVL testing from the other models and to move the development of the STOVL aircraft to the back of the overall Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) production sequence. We believe that these actions will better position the STOVL variant to demonstrate improved reliability over the next two years. Given the size and complexity of the F-35 program, we anticipate that there will be additional reviews related to program schedule, cost, requirements, and aircraft quantities as part of the DoD, Congressional, and international partners oversight and budgeting processes. Current program challenges include completion of the flight testing, supply chain performance, and software development. The SDD portion of the F-35 program has $586 million of fee remaining. Any portion of the remaining fee that we or our partners receive is dependent upon completion of milestones, most of which have not yet been determined. Although not exclusively related to the F-35 program, on October 4, 2010, the Defense Contracting Management Agency ( DCMA ) withdrew its prior validation and determination of compliance of the earned value management system (EVMS) at our Fort Worth, Texas location. EVMS is a tool for managing cost and schedule performance on complex programs. To re-establish EVMS compliance at Fort Worth, we need to demonstrate corrective actions have been implemented to address prior DCMA audit findings on EVMS affecting the F-35 and other Aeronautics programs which are managed at that location. The DCMA may choose to re-audit our EVMS system at any time, but we understand that the DCMA will do so once a performance history on the new SDD baseline is established. The new SDD baseline may not be established until after the initial baseline review is completed in late 2011. On October 7, 2010, the Israeli Government signed a letter of offer and acceptance with the U.S. Government for the procurement of F-35 aircraft. Israel is expected to be the first country to receive the F-35 through the U.S. Government foreign military sales process. Portfolio Shaping Activities We continuously strive to strengthen our portfolio of products and services to meet the current and future needs of our customers. We accomplish this internally through our independent research and development activities, and through acquisition, divestiture, and internal realignment activities. 26 Table of Contents We selectively pursue the acquisition of businesses and investments that complement our current portfolio and allow access to new customers or technologies. We have made a number of niche acquisitions of businesses and investments in affiliates during the past several years. We also may explore the divestiture of businesses. If we were to decide to sell a business, the resulting gains, if any, would be recorded when the transactions are completed or as otherwise required under GAAP and losses, if any, would be recorded when the carrying value of the related business is determined to be impaired. We also undertake internal realignment activities to adjust our portfolio of businesses to address changes in customer demand for our products and services. Divestitures In June 2010, we announced plans to divest Pacific Architects and Engineers, Inc. (PAE) and most of our Enterprise Integration Group (EIG), two businesses within our IS&GS reporting segment (see Note 2). PAE and EIG operating results are included in discontinued operations on our Statements of Earnings for all periods presented, and PAE assets and liabilities are classified as held for sale on our 2010 Balance Sheet. In November 2010, we closed on the sale of EIG. Our decision to divest EIG was based on our analysis of the U.S. Government increased concerns about perceived organizational conflicts of interest within the defense contracting community. EIG provides systems engineering, architecture, and integration services and support to a broad range of government customers. On February 22, 2011, we announced that we entered into a definitive agreement to sell PAE. We expect the transaction will close in the second quarter of 2011, subject to satisfaction of closing conditions. The plan to divest PAE is a result of changes in customer priorities. When we acquired the business, we envisioned it as an entry point to a new customer set that would need additional services, primarily in the areas of information technology and systems integration. Those customers, however, are seeking a different mix of services, such as the construction of facilities and provision of physical security, which does not fit with our long-term strategy. Realignment Activities In 2010, Electronic Systems realigned its lines of business which now operate as Mission Systems & Sensors (MS2), Missiles & Fire Control (M&FC), and Global Training & Logistics (GT&L). The realignment included the movement of two IS&GS businesses, Readiness & Stability Operations (RSO) and Savi Technology, Inc., to Electronic Systems (see Note 5). The realignment resulted in the combination of our ground vehicles programs, which were previously reported in the former Platforms & Training (P&T) line of business and included the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle program, with M&FC. We also realigned RSO and Savi Technology, Inc. with Electronic Systems simulation, training and support business (previously included in the former P&T line of business) to form GT&L. We combined the remaining elements of the former P&T line of business with the former Maritime Systems & Sensors line of business to form MS2. These realignment activities had no effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position, or cash flows. All comparative financial information and related discussions of Electronic Systems and IS&GS in this Form 10-K reflects these realignment activities. Results of Operations Since our operating cycle is long-term and involves many types of design, development, and production (DD&P) contracts with varying production delivery schedules, the results of operations of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of recorded sales and profits, may not be indicative of future operating results. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context. All per share amounts cited in this discussion are presented on a per diluted share basis. (In millions, except per share data) 2010 2009 2008 Operating Results Net Sales $ 45,803 $ 43,995 $ 41,372 Operating Profit 4,097 4,415 5,049 Interest Expense (345 ) (308 ) (332 ) Other Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net 74 123 (91 ) Income Tax Expense (1,181 ) (1,231 ) (1,459 ) Earnings from Continuing Operations 2,645 2,999 3,167 Earnings from Discontinued Operations 281 25 50 Net Earnings $ 2,926 $ 3,024 $ 3,217 Diluted Earnings Per Common Share Continuing Operations $ 7.18 $ 7.71 $ 7.74 Discontinued Operations .76 .07 .12 Total $ 7.94 $ 7.78 $ 7.86 27 Table of Contents The following discussion of operating results provides an overview of our operations by focusing on key elements in our Statements of Earnings. The Discussion of Business Segments section that follows describes the contributions of each of our business segments to our consolidated net sales and operating profit for 2010, 2009, and 2008. We follow an integrated approach for managing the performance of our business, and focus the discussion of our results of operations around major products and lines of business versus distinguishing between products and services. Product sales are predominantly generated in the Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, and Space Systems segments, while most of our services sales are generated in our IS&GS segment. Continuing Operations For 2010, net sales were $45.8 billion, a 4% increase over 2009. Net sales for 2009 were $44.0 billion, a 6% increase over 2008 net sales of $41.4 billion. Net sales increased during 2010 in all segments except Space Systems as compared to 2009. Net sales increased during 2009 in all segments as compared to 2008 (see the Discussion of Business Segments). Our operating profit for 2010 was $4.1 billion, a decrease of 7% compared to operating profit of $4.4 billion in 2009. The decline in operating profit of $318 million primarily was attributable to the effects of charges, net of state income tax benefits, of $178 million related to the VESP and $42 million related to facilities consolidation within the MS2 line of business in Electronic Systems (see Note 3). Also contributing to the decline was an increase of $71 million in other unallocated Corporate costs attributable to various Corporate activities. Our operating profit for 2009 was $4.4 billion, a decrease of 12% compared to operating profit of $5.0 billion 2008. In 2009, operating profit was negatively affected by the FAS/CAS pension adjustment (see Note 5 for a description of this adjustment), which was an expense of $456 million in 2009 as compared to income of $128 million in 2008 due to the negative actual return on plan assets in 2008 and a lower discount rate at December 31, 2008. In addition, operating profit was lower due to recognition of a deferred gain of $108 million in 2008 from the sale of our ownership interest in Lockheed Khrunichev Energia International, Inc. (LKEI) and International Launch Services, Inc. (ILS) in 2006 (see Note 3); earnings of $85 million recorded in 2008 associated with reserves related to various land sales that were no longer required (see Note 3); and a $24 million loss on the 2009 sale of a foreign subsidiary. These declines more than offset increased operating profit at the Aeronautics, Electronic Systems and Space Systems business segments. Interest expense for 2010 was $345 million, or $37 million higher than 2009. The increase mainly was driven by interest expense on the $1.5 billion of long-term notes issued in the fourth quarter of 2009. Interest expense for 2009 was $308 million, or $24 million lower than 2008. The decrease mainly was driven by the August 2008 redemption of our $1.0 billion of floating rate convertible debentures, partially offset by increases resulting from the fourth quarter 2009 issuance of $1.5 billion of long-term notes and the first quarter 2008 issuance of $500 million of long-term notes. Other non-operating income (expense), net was income of $74 million and $123 million in 2010 and 2009, and expense of $91 million in 2008. The changes between periods primarily reflect gains (losses) on marketable securities held to fund certain non-qualified employee benefit obligations. Our effective income tax rates from continuing operations were 30.9% for 2010, 29.1% for 2009, and 31.5% for 2008. These rates were lower than the statutory rate of 35% for all periods due to tax benefits for U.S. manufacturing activities, the deduction of dividends related to certain of our defined contribution plans with an employee stock ownership plan feature, and the research and development (R&D) tax credit. The 2010 effective tax rate was affected by the enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010, which eliminated the tax deduction for company-paid retiree prescription drug expenses to the extent they are reimbursed under Medicare Part D, beginning in 2013. As a result, the Corporation recorded additional income tax expense of $96 million in 2010. The rate for 2010 also included additional tax benefits related to U.S. manufacturing activities primarily due to an increase in qualified production activity income and an increase in the U.S. manufacturing activity deduction rate from 6% to 9%. The 2009 effective tax rate reflected a reduction of income tax expense of $69 million primarily arising from the resolution of IRS examinations of the years 2005 through 2007 and 2008. We reported net earnings from continuing operations of $2.6 billion ($7.18 per share) in 2010, $3.0 billion ($7.71 per share) in 2009, and $3.2 billion ($7.74 per share) in 2008. Both net earnings from continuing operations and earnings per share were affected by the factors discussed above. In addition, earnings per share has benefitted from the significant number of shares repurchased under our share repurchase programs (see Note 12). The effect of those repurchases has been partially offset by common stock issued under our stock-based compensation and defined contribution plans. 28 Table of Contents Discontinued Operations Discontinued operations included the operating results for PAE and EIG for all periods presented. We reported net earnings from discontinued operations of $281 million ($.76 per share) in 2010, $25 million ($.07 per share) in 2009, and $50 million ($.12 per share) in 2008 (see Note 2). Earnings from discontinued operations for 2010 included a gain, net of income taxes, of $184 million ($.50 per share) from the sale of EIG. Additionally, as a result of our decision to sell PAE in 2010, we recorded a $182 million deferred tax asset which reflects the federal and state tax benefits that we expect to realize on the sale, because our tax basis is higher than our book basis. Earnings from discontinued operations also included an impairment charge of $109 million related to the planned sale of PAE, as the carrying value of the business exceeded the expected net proceeds from the sale transaction. In total, these items associated with PAE increased 2010 earnings from discontinued operations by $73 million ($.20 per share). Discussion of Business Segments We operate in four principal business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, IS&GS, and Space Systems. We organize our business segments based on the nature of the products and services offered. The following table presents net sales and operating profit of our four business segments. Net sales exclude intersegment revenue, as these activities are eliminated in consolidation. Intercompany transactions are generally negotiated and accounted for under terms and conditions similar to other government and commercial contracts. Operating profit of the business segments includes the equity earnings or losses from investees in which certain of our business segments hold equity interests, because the activities of the investees are closely aligned with the operations of those segments. Operating profit of the business segments excludes the FAS/CAS pension adjustment discussed under the caption Postretirement Benefit Plans in the section on Critical Accounting Policies; expense for certain stock-based compensation programs including costs for stock options and restricted stock units; the effects of items not considered part of management evaluation of segment operating performance, such as the charges related to the VESP in 2010 and the MS2 consolidation plan announced in 2010 (see Note 3); gains or losses from divestitures; the effects of legal settlements; Corporate costs not allocated to the business segments; and other miscellaneous Corporate activities. The items other than the charges related to the VESP and the MS2 consolidation plan are included in Other unallocated Corporate income (expense), net in the following table which reconciles operating profit from the business segments to operating profit in our Statements of Earnings. The charges related to the VESP and MS2 consolidation plan are presented together as a separate reconciling item. (In millions) 2010 2009 2008 Net Sales Aeronautics $ 13,235 $ 12,201 $ 11,473 Electronic Systems 14,363 13,532 12,803 Information Systems & Global Solutions 9,959 9,608 9,069 Space Systems 8,246 8,654 8,027 Total $ 45,803 $ 43,995 $ 41,372 Operating Profit Aeronautics $ 1,502 $ 1,577 $ 1,433 Electronic Systems 1,712 1,660 1,583 Information Systems & Global Solutions 890 895 919 Space Systems 972 972 953 Total business segments $ 5,076 $ 5,104 4,888 VESP and other charges (220 ) Other unallocated Corporate income (expense), net (759 ) (689 ) 161 Total $ 4,097 $ 4,415 $ 5,049 The following segment discussions also include information relating to negotiated backlog for each segment. Total negotiated backlog was approximately $78.2 billion, $77.2 billion, and $80.1 billion at December 31, 2010, 2009, and 2008. These amounts included both funded backlog (unfilled firm orders for which funding has been both authorized and appropriated by the customer Congress in the case of U.S. Government agencies) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for 29 Table of Contents which funding has not yet been appropriated). Negotiated backlog does not include unexercised options or task orders to be issued under indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) contracts. Funded backlog was approximately $49.7 billion at December 31, 2010. We use the percentage-of-completion method of accounting for our long-term design, development and production contracts, which we refer to as products in our Statements of Earnings. Under this method of accounting, we record sales on contracts based upon our progress towards completion on a particular contract as well as our estimate of the profit to be earned at completion. Changes in volume refer to increases or decreases in sales resulting from varying production activity levels, deliveries, or service levels on individual contracts. Volume changes typically include a corresponding change in operating profit based on the estimate of profit at completion for a particular contract. For example, if the cost volume on a cost-reimbursement-type contract increased or decreased compared with a prior period, sales and operating profit for that contract will also be increased or decreased. Changes in performance refer to increases or decreases in the estimated profit booking rates on our contracts for products. Performance changes usually relate to revisions in the total estimated costs at completion that reflect improved or deteriorated operating or award fee performance on a particular contract. Such changes in estimated profit booking rates are recognized in the current period and reflect the inception-to-date effect of such changes. For example, if we increase the estimated profit booking rate on a cost reimbursable contract, the increase in sales and operating profit for that contract will reflect a higher return on sales in the current period due to the recognition of the higher booking rate on both current period costs as well as previously incurred costs. Accordingly, such changes in the estimated profit booking rates may affect the comparison of segment operating results. For our services contracts, changes in volume are reflective of increases or decreases in the level of services being provided under each contract. Performance refers to changes in the levels of operating profit. Sales are recognized as the services are performed, typically on a straight-line basis. Award and incentive fees related to the performance on these contracts are recognized when communicated to us by the customer. Costs associated with these contracts are expensed as incurred. Accordingly, the timing for recognizing the effect of costs and award and incentive fees on our services contracts may affect the comparison of segment operating results. The Aeronautics segment generally includes fewer programs that have much larger sales and operating results than programs included in the other segments. Due to the large number of comparatively smaller programs in the remaining segments, the discussion of the results of operations of those business segments focuses on lines of business within the segment rather than on specific programs. The following tables of financial information and related discussion of the results of operations of our business segments are consistent with the presentation of segment information in Note 5 to the financial statements. We have a number of programs that are classified by the U.S. Government and cannot be specifically described. The operating results of these classified programs are included in our consolidated and business segment results, and are subjected to the same oversight and internal controls as our other programs. Aeronautics Our Aeronautics business segment is engaged in the research, design, development, manufacture, integration, sustainment, support, and upgrade of advanced military aircraft, including combat and air mobility aircraft, unmanned air vehicles, and related technologies. Key Combat Aircraft programs include the F-35 Lightning II, F-16 Fighting Falcon, and F-22 Raptor fighter aircraft. Key Air Mobility programs include the C-130J Super Hercules and the C-5M Super Galaxy. Aeronautics provides logistics support, sustainment, and upgrade modification services for its aircraft. Aeronautics operating results included the following: (In millions) 2010 2009 2008 Net sales $ 13,235 $ 12,201 $ 11,473 Operating profit 1,502 1,577 1,433 Operating margin 11.3 % 12.9 % 12.5 % Backlog at year-end 27,500 26,700 27,200 Net sales for Aeronautics increased by 8% in 2010 compared to 2009. Sales increased in all three lines of business during the year. The $800 million increase in Air Mobility primarily was attributable to higher volume on C-130 programs, including deliveries and support activities, as well as higher volume on the C-5 Reliability Enhancement and Re-engining 30 Table of Contents Program (RERP). There were 25 C-130J deliveries in 2010 compared to 16 in 2009. The $179 million increase in Combat Aircraft principally was due to higher volume on F-35 production contracts, which partially was offset by lower volume on the F-35 SDD contract and a decline in volume on F-16, F-22 and other combat aircraft programs. There were 20 F-16 deliveries in 2010 compared to 31 in 2009. The $55 million increase in Other Aeronautics Programs mainly was due to higher volume on P-3 and advanced development programs, which partially were offset by a decline in volume on sustainment activities. Net sales for Aeronautics increased by 6% in 2009 compared to 2008. During the year, sales increased in all three lines of business. The increase of $296 million in Air Mobility sales primarily was attributable to higher volume on the C-130 programs, including deliveries and support activities. There were 16 C-130J deliveries in 2009 and 12 in 2008. Combat Aircraft sales increased $316 million principally due to higher volume on the F-35 program and increases in F-16 deliveries, which partially were offset by lower volume on F-22 and other combat aircraft programs. There were 31 F-16 deliveries in 2009 compared to 28 in 2008. The $116 million increase in Other Aeronautics Programs mainly was due to higher volume on P-3 programs and advanced development programs, which partially were offset by declines in sustainment activities. Operating profit for the segment decreased by 5% in 2010 compared to 2009. A decline in operating profit in Combat Aircraft partially was offset by increases in Other Aeronautics Programs and Air Mobility. The $149 million decrease in Combat Aircraft operating profit primarily was due to lower volume and a decrease in the level of favorable performance adjustments on the F-22 program, the F-35 SDD contract and F-16 and other combat aircraft programs in 2010. These decreases more than offset increased operating profit resulting from higher volume and improved performance on F-35 production contracts in 2010. The $35 million increase in Other Aeronautics Programs mainly was attributable to higher volume and improved performance on P-3 and advanced development programs as well as an increase in the level of favorable performance adjustments on sustainment activities in 2010. The $19 million increase in Air Mobility operating profit primarily was due to higher volume and improved performance in 2010 on C-130J support activities, which more than offset a decrease in operating profit due to a lower level of favorable performance adjustments on C-130J deliveries in 2010. The remaining change in operating profit is attributable to an increase in other income, net between the comparable periods. Aeronautics 2010 operating margins have decreased when compared to 2009. The operating margin decrease reflects the life cycles of our significant programs. Specifically, Aeronautics is performing more development and initial production work on the F-35 program and is performing less work on more mature programs such as the F-22 and F-16. Development and initial production contracts yield lower profits than mature full rate programs. Accordingly, while net sales increased in 2010 relative to 2009, operating profit decreased and consequently operating margins have declined. Operating profit for the segment increased 10% in 2009 compared to 2008. The growth in operating profit primarily was due to increases in Air Mobility and Other Aeronautics Programs. The $70 million increase in Air Mobility operating profit primarily was due to the higher volume on C-130J deliveries and C-130 support programs. In Other Aeronautics Programs, operating profit increased $120 million, which mainly was attributable to improved performance in sustainment activities and higher volume on P-3 programs. Additionally, the increase in operating profit included the favorable restructuring of a P-3 modification contract in 2009. Combat Aircraft operating profit decreased $22 million during the year primarily due to a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments on F-16 programs in 2009 compared to 2008 and lower volume on other combat aircraft programs. These decreases more than offset increased operating profit resulting from higher volume and improved performance on the F-35 program and an increase in the level of favorable performance adjustments on the F-22 program in 2009 compared to 2008. The remaining change in operating profit is attributable to a decrease in other income, net, between the comparable periods. Backlog increased in 2010 compared to 2009 mainly due to orders exceeding sales on the C-130J, F-35 and C-5 programs, which partially were offset by higher sales volume compared to new orders on the F-22 program in 2010. Backlog decreased in 2009 compared to 2008 mainly due to sales exceeding orders on the F-22 and F-35 programs, which partially were offset by orders exceeding sales on the C-130J and C-5 programs. We expect Aeronautics will have sales growth in the upper single digit percentage range for 2011 as compared to 2010. This increase primarily is driven by growth on F-35 Low Rate Initial Production (LRIP) contracts, C-130J and C-5 RERP programs that will more than offset a decline on the F-22 program. Operating profit is projected to increase at a mid single digit percentage rate above 2010 levels, resulting in a decline in operating margins between the years. Similar to the relationship of operating margins from 2009 to 2010 discussed above, the expected operating margin decrease from 2010 to 2011 reflects the trend of Aeronautics performing more development and initial production work on the F-35 program and is performing less work on more mature programs such as the F-22 and F-16, even though sales are expected to increase in 2011 relative to 2010. 31 Table of Contents Electronic Systems Our Electronic Systems business segment manages complex programs and designs, develops, produces, and integrates hardware and software solutions to ensure the mission readiness of armed forces and government agencies worldwide. The segment three lines of business are Mission Systems & Sensors (MS2), Missiles & Fire Control (M&FC), and Global Training & Logistics (GT&L). With such a broad portfolio of programs to provide products and services, many of its activities involve a combination of both development and production contracts with varying delivery schedules. Some of its more significant programs, including the THAAD system, the Aegis Weapon System, and the Littoral Combat Ship program, demonstrate the diverse products and services Electronic Systems provides. Electronic Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2010 2009 2008 Net sales $ 14,363 $ 13,532 $ 12,803 Operating profit 1,712 1,660 1,583 Operating margin 11.9 % 12.3 % 12.4 % Backlog at year-end 23,200 23,100 23,500 Net sales for Electronic Systems increased by 6% in 2010 compared to 2009. Sales increased in all three lines of business during the year. The $421 million increase at GT&L primarily was due to growth on readiness and stability operations, which partially was offset by lower volume on simulation & training programs. The $316 million increase at M&FC primarily was due to higher volume on tactical missile and air defense programs, which partially was offset by a decline in volume on fire control systems. The $94 million increase at MS2 mainly was due to higher volume on surface naval warfare, ship & aviation systems, and radar systems programs, which partially was offset by lower volume on undersea warfare programs. Net sales for Electronic Systems increased by 6% in 2009 compared to 2008. Sales increases in M&FC and GT&L more than offset a decline in MS2. The $429 million increase in sales at M&FC primarily was due to growth on tactical missile programs and fire control systems. The $355 million increase at GT&L primarily was due to growth on simulation and training activities and readiness and stability operations. The increase in simulation and training also included sales from the first quarter 2009 acquisition of Universal Systems and Technology, Inc. The $55 million decrease at MS2 mainly was due to lower volume on ship & aviation systems and undersea warfare programs, which partially were offset by higher volume on radar systems and surface naval warfare programs. Operating profit for the segment increased by 3% in 2010 compared to 2009. Operating profit increases at M&FC and GT&L more than offset a decline at MS2. The $73 million increase at M&FC mainly was due to higher volume and improved performance on certain tactical missile programs and higher volume on air defense programs. The $23 million increase at GT&L primarily was attributable to higher volume on readiness and stability operations and improved performance on simulation and training programs. These increases more than offset declines due to lower volume and performance on other logistics programs and the absence in 2010 of a benefit recognized in the first quarter of 2009 from favorably resolving a contract matter at simulation & training programs. The $44 million decrease in operating profit at MS2 mainly was due to lower volume and performance on undersea warfare programs and a decrease in the level of favorable performance adjustments on surface naval warfare programs in 2010. These declines partially were offset by higher volume and improved performance on ship & aviation systems and radar systems programs in 2010. Operating profit for the segment increased by 5% in 2009 compared to 2008. In 2009, increases in operating profit at M&FC and GT&L more than offset declines at MS2. Operating profit increased $110 million at M&FC mainly due to higher volume and improved performance on fire control systems and tactical missile programs. The increase in operating profit of $34 million at GT&L primarily was due to higher volume and improved performance on simulation and training programs and readiness and stability operations. Additionally, the increase included a benefit recognized in 2009 from favorably resolving a simulation and training contract matter. These increases partially were offset by lower volume and performance on other logistics programs. There was a $67 million decrease in operating profit at MS2, which primarily was attributable to lower volume on ship & aviation programs and a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments on ship & aviation systems and undersea warfare programs in 2009 compared to 2008. Backlog increased in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily from increased orders for air defense and tactical missile programs at M&FC and readiness and stability operations at GT&L. These increases partially were offset by higher sales volume on ship & aviation systems and surface naval warfare programs at MS2. Backlog decreased in 2009 compared to 32 Table of Contents 2008 due to the U.S. Government exercise of the termination for convenience clause on the VH-71 Presidential Helicopter Program at MS2, which resulted in a $985 million reduction. This decline more than offset increased orders on air defense and tactical missile programs at M&FC and simulation and training activities at GT&L. We expect Electronic Systems sales to decline in 2011 in the low single digit percentage range as compared to 2010. The decline primarily is due to our completion of the persistent threat detection system (PTDS) program in 2010, coupled with the delayed timing of awards such as the Littoral Combat Ship and certain missile defense contracts. We expect the decline to be partially offset by growth in readiness and stability contracts. Operating profit is expected to decline in line with sales, with operating margins expected to be similar to those in 2010. Information Systems & Global Solutions Our IS&GS business segment provides management services, Information Technology (IT) solutions, and advanced technology expertise across a broad spectrum of applications to U.S. Government and other customers. The segment operates in the Civil, Defense, and Intelligence lines of business. IS&GS key programs and activities include the En-Route Automation Modernization (ERAM) program, the Airborne Maritime Fixed Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) program, the Hanford Mission Support contract, and the Decennial Response Integration System (DRIS 2010) program. The DRIS 2010 program substantially was completed in 2010. IS&GS programs also include a large number of IDIQ and task order types of contracts across each of its lines of business. IS&GS operating results included the following: (In millions) 2010 2009 2008 Net sales $ 9,959 $ 9,608 $ 9,069 Operating profit 890 895 919 Operating margin 8.9 % 9.3 % 10.1 % Backlog at year-end 9,700 10,600 11,500 Net sales for IS&GS increased by 4% in 2010 compared to 2009. Sales increased in Civil and Defense but declined in Intelligence during the year. Civil increased $437 million principally due to higher volume on enterprise civilian services. Defense sales increased $20 million primarily due to higher volume on mission and combat systems activities. The $106 million decline in Intelligence programs mainly was due to lower volume on security solutions. Net sales for IS&GS increased by 6% in 2009 compared to 2008. Sales increased in all three lines of business during the year. Net sales at Civil increased by $324 million principally due to higher volume on enterprise civilian services. Defense sales increased $192 million primarily due to higher volume on mission and combat systems activities. The $23 million increase in Intelligence mainly was due to higher volume on security solutions. Operating profit for the segment decreased by 1% in 2010 compared to 2009. For the year, operating profit declines in Defense more than offset an increase in Civil, while operating profit at Intelligence essentially was unchanged. The $27 million decrease in operating profit at Defense primarily was attributable to a decrease in the level of favorable performance adjustments on mission and combat systems activities in 2010. The $19 million increase in Civil principally was due to higher volume on enterprise civilian services. Operating profit for the segment decreased by 3% in 2009 compared to 2008. Operating profit declines in Civil and Intelligence partially were offset by growth in Defense. The decrease of $29 million in Civil operating profit primarily was attributable to a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments on enterprise civilian services programs in 2009 compared to 2008. The decrease in operating profit of $27 million at Intelligence mainly was due to a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments on security solution activities in 2009 compared to 2008. The increase in Defense operating profit of $29 million mainly was due to volume and improved performance in mission and combat systems. The decrease in backlog during 2010 compared to 2009 mainly was due to higher sales volume on enterprise civilian service programs at Civil, including volume associated with the DRIS 2010 program, and mission and combat system programs at Defense. Backlog decreased in 2009 compared to 2008 due to U.S. Government exercise of the termination for convenience clause on the TSAT Mission Operations System (TMOS) contract at Defense, which resulted in a $1.6 billion reduction in orders. This decline more than offset increased orders on enterprise civilian services programs at Civil. We expect IS&GS will experience a low single digit percentage decrease in sales for 2011 as compared to 2010. This decline primarily is due to completion of most of the work associated with the DRIS 2010 program. Operating profit in 2011 is expected to decline in relationship to the decline in sales volume, while operating margins are expected to be comparable between the years. 33 Table of Contents Space Systems Our Space Systems business segment is engaged in the design, research and development, engineering, and production of satellites, strategic and defensive missile systems, and space transportation systems, including activities related to the planned replacement of the Space Shuttle. Government satellite programs include the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) system, the Mobile User Objective System (MUOS), the Global Positioning Satellite III (GPS III) system, the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS), and the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite R-Series (GOES-R). Strategic and missile defense programs include the targets and countermeasures program and the fleet ballistic missile program. Space transportation includes the NASA Orion program and, through ownership interests in two joint ventures, expendable launch services (United Launch Alliance, or ULA) and Space Shuttle processing activities for the U.S. Government (United Space Alliance, or USA). The Space Shuttle is expected to complete its final flight mission in 2011 and our involvement with its launch and processing activities will end at that time. Space Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2010 2009 2008 Net sales $ 8,246 $ 8,654 $ 8,027 Operating profit 972 972 953 Operating margin 11.8 % 11.2 % 11.9 % Backlog at year-end 17,800 16,800 17,900 Net sales for Space Systems decreased by 5% in 2010 compared to 2009. Sales declined in all three lines of business during the year. The $253 million decrease in Space Transportation principally was due to lower volume on the space shuttle external tank, commercial launch vehicle activity and other human space flight programs, which partially were offset by higher volume on the Orion program. There were no commercial launches in 2010 compared to one commercial launch in 2009. Strategic & Defensive Missile Systems (S&DMS) sales declined $147 million principally due to lower volume on defensive missile programs. The $8 million sales decline in Satellites primarily was attributable to lower volume on commercial satellites, which partially were offset by higher volume on government satellite activities. There was one commercial satellite delivery in 2010 and one commercial satellite delivery in 2009. Net sales for Space Systems increased 8% in 2009 compared to 2008. During the year, sales growth at Satellites and Space Transportation offset a decline in S&DMS. The sales growth of $707 million in Satellites was due to higher volume in government satellite activities, which partially was offset by lower volume in commercial satellite activities. There was one commercial satellite delivery in 2009 and two deliveries in 2008. The increase in sales of $21 million in Space Transportation primarily was due to higher volume on the Orion program, which more than offset a decline in the space shuttle external tank program. There was one commercial launch in both 2009 and 2008. S&DMS sales decreased by $102 million mainly due to lower volume on defensive missile programs, which more than offset growth in strategic missile programs. Operating profit for the segment was unchanged for 2010 compared to 2009. Growth in Space Transportation operating profit was more than offset by a decline in Satellites operating profit. S&DMS operating profit was relatively unchanged between periods. The $21 million increase in Space Transportation mainly was attributable to higher equity earnings on the ULA and USA joint ventures and higher volume on the Orion program, which partially were offset by lower volume on the space shuttle external tank program. Satellites operating profit decreased $23 million primarily due to lower volume and performance on commercial satellite programs, which partially was offset by higher volume and improved performance on government satellite programs in 2010. Equity earnings represented 27% of operating profit at Space Systems in 2010, compared to 22% in 2009. Operating profit for the segment increased 2% in 2009 compared to 2008. During the year, operating profit growth at Satellites more than offset declines at Space Transportation and S&DMS. In Satellites, the operating profit increase of $88 million mainly was due to higher volume on government satellite activities, which partially was offset by lower volume in commercial satellite activities. The decrease of $46 million in Space Transportation operating profit mainly was attributable to the absence in 2009 of a benefit recognized in 2008 from the successful negotiations of a terminated commercial launch vehicle contract, lower volume on the space shuttle external tank program, and lower equity earnings in 2009 on the ULA joint venture. The decrease in S&DMS operating profit of $19 million primarily was attributable to a lower volume on defensive missile programs and a reduction in the level of favorable performance adjustments in 2009 compared to 2008 on strategic missile programs. Total equity earnings recognized by Space Systems, which includes ULA and USA, represented 22% of the segment operating profit in 2009 compared to 24% in 2008. 34 Table of Contents Backlog increased in 2010 compared to 2009 mainly due to orders exceeding sales on government satellite programs in Satellites and strategic missile programs in S&DMS, which more than offset higher sales volume compared to new orders on the Orion program in Space Transportation in 2010. The decrease in backlog during 2009 compared to 2008 was primarily attributable to declines in orders and higher sales volume on the Orion program in Space Transportation and on government satellite programs in Satellites. We expect Space Systems sales for 2011 will be comparable with the 2010 results. Sales are expected to decline due to the end of our production of the external tank for the space shuttle, offset by growth in satellite activities. Segment operating profit is expected to be down slightly primarily due to lower anticipated levels of equity earnings from our ownership interest in USA, which provides processing activities for the space shuttle. USA activities will be winding down as the space shuttle last flight will be in 2011. Segment operating margin is expected to slightly decline due to the lower equity earnings. Unallocated Corporate Income (Expense), Net The following table shows the components of unallocated Corporate income (expense), net, including the CAS expense that is included as expense in the segments operating results, the related FAS pension expense, and the resulting FAS/CAS pension adjustment. (In millions) 2010 2009 2008 VESP and other charges (a) $ (220 ) $ $ Other unallocated Corporate income (expense), net: FAS/CAS pension adjustment: FAS pension expense (1,442 ) (1,036 ) (462 ) Less: CAS expense (988 ) (580 ) (590 ) FAS/CAS pension adjustment income (expense) (454 ) (456 ) 128 Other items not considered in segment operating performance 193 Stock compensation expense (168 ) (154 ) (155 ) Other, net (137 ) (79 ) (5 ) Total other unallocated Corporate income (expense), net (759 ) (689 ) 161 $ (979 ) $ (689 ) $ 161 (a) Includes the $178 million charge associated with the VESP for qualifying company executives we announced in July 2010 and the $42 million charge associated with the MS2 facilities consolidation (see Note 3). The approximate amounts of the VESP attributable to our business segments were as follows: Aeronautics $25 million; Electronic Systems $38 million; IS&GS $42 million; and Space Systems $41 million. The remaining $32 million was attributable to Corporate. FAS pension expense increased in 2010 compared to 2009, and in 2009 compared to 2008, due to the 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate each year and continued amortization of the actuarial losses incurred in 2008 as a result of the significant negative return on plan assets compared to our 8.5% long-term rate of return assumption (see the related discussion in Critical Accounting Policies under the caption Postretirement Benefit Plans ). Certain items are excluded from segment results as part of senior management evaluation of segment operating performance consistent with the management approach permitted by GAAP, such as the charges related to the VESP and the MS2 consolidation of facilities in 2010 (see Note 3); gains or losses from divestitures; the effects of legal settlements; Corporate costs not allocated to the business segments; and other miscellaneous Corporate activities. The charges related to the VESP and the MS2 consolidation of facilities are presented together on a separate line item in the table above. On a combined basis, these items decreased net earnings for 2010 by $143 million ($.38 per share). All such items for 2008 are included in Other items not considered in segment operating performance in the table above and consisted of: $108 million related to the recognition of a deferred gain recorded in connection with the sale of Lockheed Khrunichev Energia International, Inc. (LKEI) and International Launch Services, Inc. (ILS) and $85 million related to the elimination or reserves associated with various land sales (see Note 3). On a combined basis, these items increased net earnings for 2008 by $126 million ($.31 per share). In 2009, there were no such items included in unallocated Corporate income (expense), net. The change in the Other, net component of unallocated Corporate income (expense), net, between the periods primarily was due to higher expense associated with a number of Corporate activities. 35 Table of Contents Liquidity and Cash Flows Our access to capital resources that provide liquidity has not been materially affected by the changing economic and market conditions over the past few years. We continually monitor changes in such conditions so that we can timely respond to any related developments. We have generated strong operating cash flows which have been the primary source of funding for our operations, debt service and repayments, capital expenditures, share repurchases, dividends, acquisitions, and postretirement benefit plan funding. We have accessed the capital markets on limited occasions, as needed or when opportunistic. We issued $728 million of notes in exchange for $611 million of our then outstanding debt securities in 2010 (see Note 10), $1.5 billion of debt securities in 2009, and $500 million of debt securities in 2008. We expect our cash from operations to continue to be sufficient to support our operations and anticipated capital expenditures for the foreseeable future. We have financing resources available to fund potential cash outflows that are less predictable or more discretionary, as discussed under Capital Structure, Resources, and Other. We have access to the credit markets, if needed, for liquidity or general corporate purposes, including letters of credit to support customer advance payments and for other trade finance purposes such as guaranteeing our performance on particular contracts. Cash received from customers, either from the payment of invoices for work performed or for advances in excess of costs incurred, is our primary source of cash. We generally do not begin work on contracts until funding is appropriated by the customer. Billing timetables and payment terms on our contracts vary based on a number of factors, including the contract type. We generally bill and collect cash more frequently under cost-reimbursable and time-and-materials contracts, which together represent approximately 60% of the revenues we recorded in 2010, as we are authorized to bill as the costs are incurred or work is performed. In contrast to cost-reimbursable contracts, for fixed-price contracts we generally do not bill until milestones, including deliveries, are achieved. A number of our fixed-price contracts may provide for performance-based payments which allow us to bill and collect cash as we perform on the contract. The U.S. Government recently has indicated that it would consider progress payments as the baseline for negotiating consideration for different payment terms on contracts, such as performance-based payments. The use of progress payments could delay the collection of receivables on certain of our contracts in future periods. Fixed-price contracts represented approximately 40% of the revenues we recorded in 2010. The majority of our capital expenditures for 2010 and those planned for 2011 can be divided into the categories of facilities infrastructure, equipment, and information technology (IT). Expenditures for facilities infrastructure and equipment are generally incurred to support new and existing programs across all of our business segments. For example, we have projects underway in our Aeronautics business segment for facilities and equipment to support production of the F-35 combat aircraft. In addition, we have projects underway to modernize certain of our facilities. We also incur capital expenditures for IT to support programs and general enterprise IT infrastructure. We have a balanced cash deployment and disciplined growth strategy to enhance shareholder value and position ourselves to take advantage of new business opportunities when they arise. Consistent with that strategy, we have invested in our business, including capital expenditures and independent research and development, repurchased shares, increased our dividends, made selective acquisitions of businesses, and managed our debt levels. The following table provides a summary of our cash flow information and the subsequent discussion provides an overview of our execution of this strategy. (In millions) 2010 2009 2008 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 3,547 $ 3,173 $ 4,421 Net Cash Used for Investing Activities (319 ) (1,518 ) (907 ) Net Cash Used for Financing Activities (3,363 ) (1,476 ) (3,938 ) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $374 million to $3,547 million in 2010 as compared to 2009. The increase primarily was attributable to an improvement in our operating working capital balances of $570 million as discussed below, and $187 million related to lower net income tax payments, as compared to 2009. Partially offsetting these improvements was a net reduction in cash from operations of $350 million related to our defined benefit pension plan. This reduction was the result of increased contributions to the pension trust of $758 million as compared to 2009, partially offset by an increase in the CAS costs recovered on our contracts. Operating working capital accounts consists of receivables, inventories, accounts payable, and customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred. The improvement in cash provided by operating working capital was due to a decline in 2010 accounts receivable balances compared to 2009, and an increase in 2010 customer advances and amounts in excess of 36 Table of Contents costs incurred balances compared to 2009. These improvements partially were offset by a decline in accounts payable balances in 2010 compared to 2009. The decline in accounts receivable primarily was due to higher collections on various programs at Electronic Systems, IS&GS, and Space Systems business areas. The increase in customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred primarily was attributable to an increase on government and commercial satellite programs at Space Systems and air mobility programs at Aeronautics, partially offset by a decrease on various programs at Electronic Systems. The decrease in accounts payable was attributable to the timing of accounts payable activities across all segments. Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $1,248 million to $3,173 million in 2009 as compared to 2008. The decline primarily was attributable to an increase in our contributions to the defined benefit pension plan of $1,373 million as compared to 2008 and an increase in our operating working capital accounts of $147 million. Partially offsetting these items was the impact of lower net income tax payments in 2009 as compared to 2008 in the amount of $319 million. The decline in cash provided by operating working capital primarily was due to growth of receivables on various programs in the MS2 and GT&L lines of business at Electronic Systems and an increase in inventories on Combat Aircraft programs at Aeronautics, which partially were offset by increases in customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred on Government Satellite programs at Space Systems and the timing of accounts payable activities. Investing Activities Capital expenditures The majority of our capital expenditures relate to facilities infrastructure and equipment that are incurred to support new and existing programs across all of our business segments. We also incur capital expenditures for IT to support programs and general enterprise IT infrastructure. Capital expenditures for property, plant and equipment amounted to $820 million in 2010, $852 million in 2009, and $926 million in 2008. We expect that our operating cash flows will continue to be sufficient to fund our annual capital expenditures over the next few years. Acquisitions, divestitures and other activities Acquisition activities include both the acquisition of businesses and investments in affiliates. Amounts paid in 2010 of $148 million primarily related to investments in affiliates. We paid $435 million in 2009 for acquisition activities, compared with $233 million in 2008. In 2010, we received proceeds of $798 million from the sale of EIG, net of $17 million in transaction costs (see Note 2). There were no material divestiture activities in 2009 and 2008. During 2010, we increased our short-term investments by $171 million compared to an increase of $279 million in 2009. Financing Activities Share activity and dividends During 2010, 2009, and 2008, we repurchased 33.0 million, 24.9 million, and 29.0 million shares of our common stock for $2,483 million, $1,851 million, and $2,931 million. Of the shares we repurchased in 2010, 0.9 million shares for $63 million were repurchased in December but settled and were paid for in January 2011. In October 2010, our Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase program for the repurchase of our common stock from time-to-time, up to an authorized amount of $3.0 billion (see Note 12). Under the program, we have discretion to determine the dollar amount of shares to be repurchased and the timing of any repurchases in compliance with applicable law and regulation. We repurchased a total of 11.2 million shares under the program for $776 million, and as of December 31, 2010, there remained $2,224 million available for additional share repurchases. In connection with their approval of the new share repurchase program, our Board terminated our previous share repurchase program. Cash received from the issuance of our common stock in connection with stock option exercises during 2010, 2009, and 2008 totaled $59 million, $40 million, and $250 million. Those activities resulted in the issuance of 1.4 million shares, 1.0 million shares, and 4.7 million shares during the respective periods. Shareholders were paid cash dividends of $969 million in 2010, $908 million in 2009, and $737 million in 2008. We have increased our quarterly dividend rate in each of the last three years. We declared quarterly dividends of: $.63 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2010 and $.75 per share for the last quarter; $.57 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2009 and $.63 per share for the last quarter; and $.42 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2008 and $.57 per share for the last quarter. Issuance and repayment of long-term debt In connection with the debt exchange completed in May 2010 (see Note 10), we paid a total of $47 million for a portion of the premium associated with the transaction and related expenses incurred with third parties. We issued a total of $1.5 billion of long-term notes in 2009 (see Note 10) and $500 million of long-term notes in 2008. There were no repayments of long-term debt in 2010, and there are no scheduled maturity payments due prior 37 Table of Contents to 2013. In 2009, we paid $242 million in repayments of long-term debt based on scheduled maturities. In 2008, we paid a total of $1.0 billion representing the principal amount of our floating rate convertible debentures that were delivered for conversion or otherwise redeemed. We also paid another $103 million during 2008 related to other repayments of long-term debt based on scheduled maturities. Capital Structure, Resources, and Other At December 31, 2010, we held cash and cash equivalents of $2.3 billion and short-term investments of $516 million. Our long-term debt, net of unamortized discounts, amounted to $5.0 billion. As of the end of 2010, our long-term debt bears interest at fixed rates and mainly is in the form of publicly-issued notes and debentures. We issued $728 million of new 5.72% Notes due 2040 (the New Notes) in May 2010 in exchange for $611 million of our then outstanding debt securities (see Note 10). We paid a premium of $158 million, of which $117 million was in the form of New Notes and $41 million was paid in cash, which was recorded as a discount and will be amortized as additional interest expense over the life of the New Notes using the effective interest method. The New Notes are included on our Balance Sheet net of the unamortized discount. In November 2009, we issued a total of $1.5 billion of long-term notes in a registered public offering (see Note 10), $900 million of which are due in 2019 and have a fixed coupon interest rate of 4.25%, and $600 million of which are due in 2039 and have a fixed coupon interest rate of 5.50%. Our stockholders equity was $3.7 billion at December 31, 2010, a decrease of $421 million from December 31, 2009. The decrease primarily was due to the repurchase of 33.0 million common shares for $2.5 billion; the payment of $969 million of dividends during the year; and adjustments related to our postretirement benefit plans at December 31 (see Note 11) which on a net basis increased the accumulated other comprehensive loss by $430 million. These decreases partially were offset by net earnings of $2.9 billion and employee stock activity of $520 million. As we repurchase our common shares, we reduce common stock for the $1 of par value of the shares repurchased, with the remainder of the purchase price over par value recorded as a reduction of additional paid-in capital. Due to the volume of repurchases made under our share repurchase programs, additional paid-in capital was reduced to zero, with the remainder of the excess of purchase price over par value of $1.9 billion recorded as a reduction of retained earnings. At December 31, 2010, we had in place with a group of banks a $1.5 billion revolving credit facility which expires in June 2012. There were no borrowings outstanding under the facility during the year ended December 31, 2010. Borrowings under the credit facility would be unsecured and bear interest at rates based, at our option, on the Eurodollar rate or a bank defined Base Rate. Each bank obligation to make loans under the credit facility is subject to, among other things, our compliance with various representations, warranties and covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets, and a covenant not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio. The leverage ratio covenant excludes the adjustments recognized in stockholders equity related to our postretirement benefit plans. As of December 31, 2010, we were in compliance with all covenants contained in the credit facility agreement. We have agreements in place with banking institutions to provide for the issuance of commercial paper. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2010. If we were to issue commercial paper, the borrowings would be supported by the $1.5 billion revolving credit facility. We also have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission to provide for the issuance of an indeterminate amount of debt securities. We actively seek to finance our business in a manner that preserves financial flexibility while minimizing borrowing costs to the extent practicable. We review changes in financial market, and economic conditions to manage the types, amounts, and maturities of our indebtedness. We may at times refinance existing indebtedness, vary our mix of variable-rate and fixed-rate debt, or seek alternative financing sources for our cash and operational needs. Return on invested capital (ROIC) declined by 200 basis points during 2010 to 17.9%. The decline was primarily driven by the issuance of $1.5 billion in debt securities in November 2009 and lower net earnings in 2010 compared to 2009. We define ROIC as net earnings plus after-tax interest expense divided by average invested capital (stockholders equity plus debt), after adjusting stockholders equity by adding back amounts related to postretirement benefit plans. We believe that reporting ROIC provides investors with greater visibility into how effectively we use the capital invested in our operations. We use ROIC as one of the inputs in our evaluation of multi-year investment decisions and as a long-term performance measure. We also use ROIC as a factor in evaluating management performance under certain of our incentive compensation plans. 38 Table of Contents ROIC is not a measure of financial performance under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, and may not be defined and calculated by other companies in the same manner. ROIC should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net earnings as an indicator of performance. ROIC for 2010, 2009 and 2008 was calculated as follows: (In millions) 2010 2009 2008 Net earnings $ 2,926 $ 3,024 $ 3,217 Interest expense (multiplied by 65%) 1 224 200 216 Return $ 3,150 $ 3,224 $ 3,433 Average debt 2, 5 $ 5,032 $ 4,054 $ 4,346 Average equity 3, 5 3,904 3,155 8,236 Average benefit plan adjustments 4, 5 8,650 8,960 3,256 Average invested capital $ 17,586 $ 16,169 $ 15,838 Return on invested capital 17.9 % 19.9 % 21.7 % 1 Represents after-tax interest expense utilizing the federal statutory rate of 35%. Interest expense is added back to net earnings as it represents the return to debt holders. Debt is included as a component of average invested capital. 2 Debt consists of long-term debt, including current maturities of long-term debt, and short-term borrowings (if any). 3 Equity includes non-cash adjustments, primarily related to benefit plan adjustments as discussed in Note 4 below. 4 Average benefit plan adjustments reflect the cumulative value of entries identified in our Statements of Stockholders Equity related to adjustments to recognize the funded status of our benefit plans. The total of annual benefit plan adjustments to equity were: 2010 $(430) million; 2009 $495 million; and 2008 $(7,253) million. As these entries are recorded in the fourth quarter, the value added back to our average equity in a given year is the cumulative impact of all prior year entries plus 20% of the current year entry value. The cumulative impact of benefit plan adjustments through December 31, 2007 was $(1,806) million. 5 Yearly averages are calculated using balances at the start of the year and at the end of each quarter. Contractual Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements At December 31, 2010, we had contractual commitments to repay debt, make payments under operating leases, settle obligations related to agreements to purchase goods and services, and settle tax and other liabilities. Capital lease obligations were negligible. Payments due under these obligations and commitments are as follows: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Total Less Than 1 Year Years 2 and 3 Years 4 and 5 After 5 Years Long-term debt (a) $ 5,524 $ $ 650 $ $ 4,874 Interest payments 5,913 332 648 600 4,333 Other liabilities 2,483 446 400 287 1,350 Operating lease obligations 1,299 300 416 259 324 Purchase obligations: Operating activities 22,461 12,212 7,501 1,917 831 Capital expenditures 237 124 113 Total contractual cash obligations $ 37,917 $ 13,414 $ 9,728 $ 3,063 $ 11,712 (a) The total amount of long-term debt excludes the unamortized discount of $505 million (see Note 10). Generally, our long-term debt obligations are subject to, along with other things, compliance with certain covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets. As of December 31, 2010, we were in compliance with all covenants contained in our debt agreements. Interest payments include interest related to the outstanding debt through maturity. Amounts related to other liabilities represent the contractual obligations for certain long-term liabilities recorded as of December 31, 2010. Such amounts mainly include expected payments under deferred compensation plans, non-qualified pension plans, environmental liabilities, and business acquisition agreements. Obligations related to environmental liabilities represent our estimate of obligations for sites at which we are performing remediation activities, excluding amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Government in its capacity as a potentially responsible party. The amounts also include liabilities related to unrecognized tax benefits (see Note 9). We estimated the timing of tax payments based on the expected completion of the related examinations by the applicable taxing authorities and resolution of issues pending in the Internal Revenue Service Appeals Division. 39 Table of Contents Purchase obligations related to operating activities include agreements and requirements contracts that give the supplier recourse to us for cancellation or nonperformance under the contract or contain terms that would subject us to liquidated damages. Such agreements and contracts may, for example, be related to direct materials, obligations to subcontractors, and outsourcing arrangements. Total purchase obligations in the preceding table include approximately $20.2 billion related to contractual commitments entered into as a result of contracts we have with our U.S. Government customers. The U.S. Government generally would be required to pay us for any costs we incur relative to these commitments if they were to terminate the related contracts for convenience under the FAR, subject to available funding. This also would be true in cases where we perform subcontract work for a prime contractor under a U.S. Government contract. The termination for convenience language also may be included in contracts with foreign, state, and local governments. We also have contracts with customers that do not include termination for convenience provisions, including contracts with commercial customers. Purchase obligations in the preceding table for capital expenditures generally include amounts for facilities and equipment related to customer contracts. We also may enter into industrial cooperation agreements, sometimes referred to as offset agreements, as a condition to obtaining orders for our products and services from certain customers in foreign countries. These agreements are designed to enhance the social and economic environment of the foreign country by requiring the contractor to promote investment in the country. Offset agreements may be satisfied through activities that do not require us to use cash, including transferring technology, providing manufacturing and other consulting support to in-country projects, and the purchase by third parties ( e.g., our vendors) of supplies from in-country vendors. These agreements also may be satisfied through our use of cash for such activities as purchasing supplies from in-country vendors, providing financial support for in-country projects, and building or leasing facilities for in-country operations. We typically do not commit to offset agreements until orders for our products or services are definitive. The amounts ultimately applied against our offset agreements are based on negotiations with the customer and typically require cash outlays that represent only a fraction of the original amount in the offset agreement. At December 31, 2010, we had outstanding offset agreements totaling $9.3 billion, primarily related to our Aeronautics segment, some of which extend through 2025. To the extent we have entered into purchase obligations at December 31, 2010 that also satisfy offset agreements, those amounts are included in the preceding table. Offset programs usually extend over several years and may provide for penalties in the event we fail to perform in accordance with offset requirements. We historically have not been required to pay material penalties. In connection with our ownership of United Launch Alliance, L.L.C. (ULA), we and The Boeing Company (Boeing) each committed to provide up to $200 million in financial support to ULA, as required, until at least December 1, 2011. We had a revolving credit agreement with ULA in place through September 26, 2010. No amounts were drawn on the credit agreement. On September 27, 2010, ULA entered into with a group of banks its own $400 million revolving credit agreement which expires in October 2013. At the same time, the revolving credit agreement we and Boeing had in place was terminated. The new revolving credit agreement satisfies Boeing and our commitment to provide financial support of up to $200 million each to ULA, so long as the total amount of the new agreement remains at $400 million or above until at least December 1, 2011. We and Boeing have received distributions totaling $232 million each which are subject to agreements between us, Boeing, and ULA whereby, if ULA does not have sufficient cash resources or credit capacity to make payments under the inventory supply agreement it has with Boeing, both we and Boeing would provide to ULA, in the form of an additional capital contribution, the level of funding required for ULA to make those payments. Any such capital contributions would not exceed the amount of the distributions subject to the agreements. We currently believe that ULA will have sufficient operating cash flows and credit capacity to meet its obligations, so that we will not be required to make a contribution under these agreements. In addition, we, Boeing, and ULA have cross-indemnifications in place with ULA related to financial support arrangements ( e.g. , letters of credit, surety bonds, or foreign exchange contracts) and guarantees by us and Boeing of the performance and financial obligations of ULA under certain launch service contracts. We believe ULA will be able to fully perform its obligations, as it has done through December 31, 2010, and that it will not be necessary to make payments under the cross-indemnities. 40 Table of Contents We have entered into standby letters of credit, surety bonds, and third-party guarantees with financial institutions and other third parties primarily relating to advances received from customers and/or the guarantee of future performance on certain of our contracts. In some cases, we may guarantee the contractual performance of third parties such as joint venture partners. At December 31, 2010, we had the following outstanding letters of credit, surety bonds, and guarantees: Commitment Expiration By Period (In millions) Total Commitment Less Than 1 Year (a) Years 2 and 3 (a) Years 4 and 5 (a) After 5 Years (a) Standby letters of credit $ 2,742 $ 2,388 $ 194 $ 130 $ 30 Surety bonds 403 398 5 Guarantees 1,030 1 59 180 790 Total commitments $ 4,175 $ 2,787 $ 258 $ 310 $ 820 (a) Approximately $2,190 million, $40 million, $6 million, and $3 million of standby letters of credit in the Less Than 1 Year, Years 2 and 3, Years 4 and 5, and After 5 Years periods, and approximately $40 million of surety bonds in the Less Than 1 Year period, are expected to renew for additional periods until completion of the contractual obligation. Included in the table above is approximately $267 million representing letter of credit amounts for which related obligations or liabilities are also recorded on the Balance Sheet, either as reductions of inventories, as customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred, or as other liabilities. Approximately $1.8 billion of the standby letters of credit were issued to secure advance payments received under an F-16 contract from an international customer. These letters of credit are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance, and the amount available will be reduced as certain events occur throughout the period of performance in accordance with the contract terms. Similar to the letters of credit for the F-16 contract, other letters of credit and surety bonds are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance. Approximately 85% of the $1.0 billion in third-party guarantees outstanding at December 31, 2010 related to guarantees of the contractual performance of joint ventures to which we are a party. This amount represents our estimate of the maximum amount we would expect to incur upon the contractual non-performance of our joint venture partners. We evaluate the reputation, technical capabilities, and credit quality of potential joint venture partners. In addition, we generally have cross-indemnities in place that may enable us to recover amounts that may be paid on behalf of a joint venture partner. We believe our current joint venture partners will be able to perform their obligations, as they have done through December 31, 2010, and that it will not be necessary to make payments under the guarantees. Critical Accounting Policies Contract Accounting / Sales Recognition Approximately 80% of our net sales are derived from long-term contracts for design, development, and production activities (also referred to as DD&P contracts) which we account for under the percentage-of-completion (POC) accounting model. The POC model requires that significant estimates and assumptions be made in accounting for the contracts. Our remaining net sales are derived from contracts to provide other services that are not associated with design, development, or production activities which we account for under the services accounting model. We consider the nature of our contracts and the types of products and services provided when we determine the accounting method for a particular contract. Most of our long-term contracts are denominated in U.S. dollars, including contracts for sales of military products and services to foreign governments conducted through the U.S. Government. We record sales for both DD&P activities and services under cost-reimbursable, fixed-price, and time-and-materials contracts. Contract Types Cost-reimbursable contracts Cost-reimbursable contracts, which accounted for about 60% of our total net sales over the last three years, provide for the payment of allowable costs incurred during performance of the contract plus a fee, up to a ceiling based on the amount that has been funded. We generate revenue under two general types of cost-reimbursable contracts: cost-plus-award-fee/incentive fee (which represent a substantial majority of our cost-reimbursable contracts) and cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts. Cost-plus-award-fee contracts provide for an award fee that varies within specified limits based on the customer assessment of our performance against a predetermined set of criteria, such as targets based on cost, quality, technical, and schedule criteria. Cost-plus-incentive-fee contracts provide for reimbursement of costs plus a fee which is adjusted by a formula based on the relationship of total allowable costs to total target costs (incentive based on cost) or reimbursement of costs plus an incentive to exceed stated performance targets (incentive based on performance). The fixed fee in a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract is negotiated at the inception of the contract and that fixed fee does not vary with actual costs. 41 Table of Contents Fixed-price and other contracts Under fixed-price contracts, which accounted for about 35% of our total net sales over the last three years, we agree to perform the specified work for a pre-determined price. To the extent our actual costs vary from the estimates upon which the price was negotiated, we will generate more or less profit, or could incur a loss. Some fixed-price contracts have a performance-based component under which we may earn incentive payments or incur financial penalties based on our performance. Under time-and-materials contracts, which accounted for about 5% of our total net sales over the last three years, we are paid a fixed hourly rate for each direct labor hour expended, and we are reimbursed for allowable material costs and allowable out-of-pocket expenses. To the extent our actual direct labor and associated costs vary in relation to the fixed hourly billing rates provided in the contract, we will generate more or less profit, or could incur a loss. Design, Development, and Production Contracts We record net sales and an estimated profit on a POC basis for cost-reimbursable and fixed-price DD&P contracts. Sales are recorded on time-and-materials contracts as the work is performed based on agreed-upon hourly rates and allowable costs. The POC method for DD&P contracts depends on the nature of the products provided under the contract. For example, for contracts that require us to perform a significant level of development effort in comparison to the total value of the contract and/or to deliver minimal quantities, sales are recorded using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress toward completion. Under the cost-to-cost method of accounting, we recognize sales and an estimated profit as costs are incurred based on the proportion that the incurred costs bear to total estimated costs. For contracts that require us to provide a substantial number of similar items without a significant level of development, we record sales and an estimated profit on a percentage-of-completion basis using units-of-delivery as the basis to measure progress toward completing the contract. When adjustments in estimated contract revenues or estimated costs at completion are required on DD&P contracts, any changes from prior estimates are recognized in the current period for the inception-to-date effect of the changes. When estimates of total costs to be incurred on a contract exceed total estimates of revenue to be earned, a provision for the entire loss on the contract is recorded in the period in which the loss is determined. Award fees and incentives, as well as penalties related to contract performance, are considered in estimating sales and profit rates on DD&P contracts. Estimates of award fees are based on past experience and anticipated performance. We record incentives or penalties when there is sufficient information to assess anticipated contract performance. Incentive provisions that increase or decrease earnings based solely on a single significant event are not recognized until the event occurs. For contract change orders, claims, or similar items, we apply judgment in estimating the amounts and assessing the potential for realization. These amounts are only included in contract value when they can be reliably estimated and realization is considered probable. We have accounting policies in place to address these, as well as other contractual and business arrangements to properly account for long-term contracts. Accounting for DD&P contracts requires judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract revenues and costs (including estimating award and incentive fees and penalties related to performance), and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. Due to the scope and nature of the work required to be performed on many of our contracts, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. Contract costs include material, labor, and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs. We have to make assumptions regarding labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the availability of materials, the length of time to complete the contract (to estimate increases in wages and prices for materials), performance by our subcontractors, and the availability and timing of funding from our customer, among other variables. Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes in our accounting for DD&P contracts, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if our underlying circumstances were to change. For example, if underlying assumptions were to change such that our estimated profit rate at completion for all DD&P contracts was higher or lower by one percentage point, our 2010 net earnings would have increased or decreased by approximately $250 million. Services Contracts For cost-reimbursable contracts for services that provide for award and incentive fees, we record net sales as services are performed, except for award and incentive fees. Award and incentive fees are recorded when they are fixed or determinable, generally at the date the amount is communicated to us by the customer. This approach results in the 42 Table of Contents recognition of such fees at contractual intervals (typically every six months) throughout the contract and is dependent on the customer processes for notification of awards and issuance of formal notifications. Under a fixed-price service contract, we are paid a predetermined fixed amount for a specified scope of work and generally have full responsibility for the costs associated with the contract and the resulting profit or loss. We record net sales under fixed-price service contracts on a straight-line basis over the period of contract performance, unless evidence suggests that net sales are earned or the obligations are fulfilled in a different pattern. Costs for all service contracts are expensed as incurred. The majority of our service contracts are in our IS&GS segment. 2011 Change in Revenue Recognition on Service Contracts with the U.S. Government Effective January 1, 2011, we changed our methodology for recognizing net sales for service contracts with the U.S. Government. We will recognize sales on those contracts using the POC method similar to our DD&P contracts as described above. As such, we expect that over 95% of our consolidated net sales will be recognized using the POC method. We believe the POC method is preferable, as consistent revenue recognition application across all contracts with the U.S. Government better reflects the underlying economics of those contracts and aligns our financial reporting with others in our industry. Beginning with our first quarter 2011 financial statements, all prior periods presented will be retrospectively adjusted to apply the new method of accounting. The effect of this change is expected to be less than one percent of net sales and segment operating profit in 2011, and was not material to prior periods. Other Contract Accounting Considerations The majority of our sales are driven by pricing based on costs incurred to produce products or perform services under contracts with the U.S. Government. Cost-based pricing is determined under the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR). The FAR provides guidance on the types of costs that are allowable in establishing prices for goods and services under U.S. Government contracts. For example, costs such as those related to charitable contributions, interest expense, and certain advertising and public relations activities are unallowable, and therefore not recoverable through sales. In addition, we may enter into advance agreements with the U.S. Government that address the subjects of allowability and allocability of costs to contracts for specific matters. For example, most of the environmental costs we incur for groundwater treatment and soil remediation related to sites operated in prior years are allocated to our current operations as general and administrative costs under FAR provisions and supporting advance agreements reached with the U.S. Government. We closely monitor compliance with, and the consistent application of, our critical accounting policies related to contract accounting. Business segment personnel evaluate our contracts through periodic contract status and performance reviews. Also, regular and recurring evaluations of contract cost, scheduling, and technical matters are performed by management personnel independent from the business segment performing work under the contract. Costs incurred and allocated to contracts are reviewed for compliance with U.S. Government regulations by our personnel, and are subject to audit by the Defense Contract Audit Agency. Postretirement Benefit Plans Most of our employees are covered by defined benefit pension plans, and we provide certain health care and life insurance benefits to eligible retirees (collectively, postretirement benefit plans see Note 11). The impact of these plans and benefits on our earnings may be volatile in that the amount of expense we record for our postretirement benefit plans may materially change from year to year because those calculations are sensitive to changes in several key economic assumptions and workforce demographics. We recognize on a plan-by-plan basis the funded status of our postretirement benefit plans under GAAP as either an asset or liability on our Balance Sheets, with a corresponding adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax, in stockholders equity. The funded status is measured as the difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the benefit obligation of the plan as determined under GAAP. Actuarial Assumptions GAAP requires that the amounts we record related to our plans be computed using actuarial valuations. The primary year-end assumptions used to estimate postretirement benefit plan expense for the following calendar year are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets for all postretirement benefit plans; the rates of increase in future compensation levels for the participants in our defined benefit pension plans; and the health care cost trend rates for our retiree medical plans. The discount rate we select impacts both the calculation of the benefit obligation at the end of the year and the calculation of net postretirement benefit plan cost in the subsequent year. The difference between the long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption we select and the actual return on plan assets in any given year affects both the funded status of our benefit plans and the calculation of net postretirement benefit plan cost in subsequent years. We use judgment in 43 Table of Contents reassessing these assumptions each year because we have to consider past and current market conditions, and make judgments about future market trends. We also have to consider factors such as the timing and amounts of expected contributions to the plans and benefit payments to plan participants. We selected 5.5% as the discount rate for calculating our benefit obligations at December 31, 2010, compared to 5.875% at the end of 2009 and 6.125% at the end of 2008. We evaluate several data points in order to arrive at an appropriate discount rate, including results from cash flow models, quoted rates from long-term bond indices, and changes in long-term bond rates over the past year. As part of our evaluation, we calculate the approximate average yields on securities that were selected to match our projected postretirement benefit plan cash flows. Our postretirement benefit plan cash flows are input into actuarial models that include data for corporate bonds rated AA or better. We concluded that 8.50% was a reasonable estimate for the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption at December 31, 2010, consistent with the rate used at December 31, 2009. The long-term rate of return assumption represents the expected average rate of earnings on the funds invested, or to be invested, to provide for the benefits included in the plan obligation. This assumption is based on several factors including historical market index returns, the anticipated long-term allocation of plan assets, the historical return data for the trust funds, plan expenses, and the potential to outperform market index returns. The actual return in any specific year likely will differ from the assumption, but the average expected return over a long-term future horizon should be approximately equal to the assumption. As a result, changes in this assumption are less frequent than changes in the discount rate. Any variance in a given year should not, by itself, suggest that the assumption should be changed. Patterns of variances are reviewed over time and then combined with expectations for the future. Our stockholders equity decreased on a net basis by $430 million at December 31, 2010 due to two noncash, after-tax adjustments recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss related to the annual remeasurement of our postretirement benefit plans. The first adjustment decreased stockholders equity by $983 million and was driven by the decline in the discount rate used to calculate postretirement benefit liabilities, partially offset by the effects of the approximate 13% actual return on plan assets resulting from market conditions in 2010. The amount primarily represents net actuarial gains and losses resulting from the differences between actual experience and our actuarial assumptions, which will be amortized to expense in future periods. The second adjustment increased stockholders equity by $553 million and represents the recognition in earnings of amounts which were recorded as a component of stockholders equity in prior years. These amounts primarily related to investment losses in 2008 on the assets held in trust to support our postretirement benefit plans, partially offset by the effects of investment gains in 2009 and 2010 (each as compared to our 8.50% long-term rate of return assumption). We also expect that our 2011 pension expense will increase to $1,825 million as compared with 2010 pension expense of $1,442 million, primarily due to the decrease in the discount rate, together with the net effect of the recognition of the 2008 investment losses, partially offset by the effects of investment gains in 2009 and 2010 as discussed above. For a discussion of changes in pension expense over the past three years, see the discussion under the caption Unallocated Corporate Income (Expense), Net. The discount rate assumption we select at the end of each year is based on our best estimates and judgment. A reasonably possible change of plus or minus 25 basis points in the 5.5% discount rate assumption at December 31, 2010, with all other assumptions held constant, would have decreased or increased the amount of the qualified pension benefit obligation we recorded at the end of 2010 by over $1.1 billion, which would have resulted in an after-tax increase or decrease in stockholders equity at the end of the year of approximately $750 million. If the 5.5% discount rate at December 31, 2010 that was used to compute 2011 expense for our qualified defined benefit pension plans had been 25 basis points higher or lower, with all other assumptions held constant, the amount of expense projected for 2011 would be lower or higher by approximately $100 million. Funding Considerations The pension plan funding legislation enacted in 2006, known as the Pension Protection Act, had the effect of accelerating the required amount of annual pension plan contributions most companies were required to pay, beginning in 2008. The new funding requirements for large U.S. defense contractors like us were delayed until the earlier of 2011 or the year in which required changes to the U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS) rules became effective. The legislation also required the CAS Board to modify its pension accounting rules by 2010 to better align the recovery of pension contributions on U.S. Government contracts with the new accelerated funding requirements. To date, the CAS Board has not published final changes to its pension accounting rules, and therefore, we currently do not expect that the revised rules will be effective until after 2011. The Pension Protection Act will become applicable to us and other large U.S. defense contractors beginning in 2011. 44 Table of Contents CAS rules are a major factor we consider in determining our total pension funding and govern the extent to which our pension costs are allocable to and recoverable under contracts with the U.S. Government. Funded amounts are recovered over time through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and are recognized in our net sales. The amount of funding required under CAS for our qualified defined benefit pension plans for 2010, and therefore the amount included in our segments operating results for the year, was $988 million. For 2011, we expect the funding required under CAS will be about $900 million. Additional funding requirements computed under the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) rules, as well as discretionary payments, are considered to be prepayments under the CAS rules to the extent the amounts exceed CAS funding requirements. As noted above, the results of operations of our segments include pension expense only as determined and funded in accordance with CAS rules. The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension expense calculated in accordance with GAAP and pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS. Because our 2011 FAS pension expense is estimated to be $1,825 million and our 2011 CAS pension expense is expected to be $900 million, we estimate that the 2011 FAS/CAS pension adjustment will be $925 million, compared to $454 million in 2010. The FAS/CAS pension adjustment is included in unallocated Corporate income (expense), net for purposes of our segment reporting. In 2010, 2009, and 2008, we made discretionary contributions of $2,240 million, $1,482 million, and $109 million related to our qualified defined benefit pension plans. We expect to make contributions of $1.3 billion related to those plans in 2011. We also may review options for further contributions in 2011. Our inability to allocate the accelerated funding required under the Pension Protection Act in the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts in the period during which the funding is required will have the effect of increasing the amount of the FAS/CAS pension expense that is charged to earnings in 2011 and negatively affecting our cash from operations. We anticipate recovering approximately $900 million as CAS cost during 2011 as compared to our estimated funding of $1.3 billion, with the remainder being recoverable in future years. Environmental Matters We are a party to various agreements, proceedings, and potential proceedings for environmental cleanup issues, including matters at various sites where we have been designated a potentially responsible party (PRP) by the EPA or by a state agency. At the end of 2010, the total amount of liabilities recorded on our Balance Sheet for environmental matters was $935 million. We have recorded assets totaling $810 million at December 31, 2010 for the portion of environmental costs that are probable of future recovery in pricing of our products and services for agencies of the U.S. Government, as discussed below. The amount that is expected to be allocated to our non-U.S. Government contracts or that is determined to be unallowable for pricing under U.S. Government contracts has been expensed through cost of sales. We enter into agreements ( e.g., administrative orders, consent decrees) that document the extent and timing of our environmental remediation obligation. We also are involved in remediation activities at environmental sites where formal agreements either do not exist or do not quantify the extent and timing of our obligation. Environmental cleanup activities usually span many years, which makes estimating the costs more judgmental due to, for example, changing remediation technologies. To determine the costs related to cleanup sites, we have to assess the extent of contamination, effects on natural resources, the appropriate technology to be used to accomplish the remediation, and evolving regulatory environmental standards. We perform quarterly reviews of environmental remediation sites and record liabilities and assets in the period it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred and the amounts can be reasonably estimated (see the discussion under Environmental Matters in Notes 1 and 14 to the financial statements). We consider the above factors in our quarterly estimates of the timing and amount of any future costs that may be required for remediation actions, which generally results in the calculation of a range of estimates for a particular environmental site. We record a liability when it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred for the amount within the range that we determine to be our best estimate of the cost of remediation or, in cases where no amount within the range is better than another, an amount at the low end of the range. We do not discount the recorded liabilities, as the amount and timing of future cash payments are not fixed or cannot be reliably determined. Given the required level of judgment and estimation, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if different assumptions were used or if circumstances were to change ( e.g., a change in environmental standards or a change in our estimate of the extent of contamination). In January 2011, both the EPA and the California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment announced plans to regulate two chemicals, perchlorate and hexavalent chromium, to a level that is expected to be substantially lower than the 45 Table of Contents existing standard established in California. The rulemaking process is a lengthy one and may take one or more years to complete. If a substantially lower standard is adopted, we would expect a material increase in our estimates for remediation at several existing sites. Under agreements reached with the U.S. Government, most of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation are allocated to our operations as general and administrative costs. Under existing government regulations, these and other environmental expenditures relating to our U.S. Government business, after deducting any recoveries received from insurance or other PRPs, are allowable in establishing prices of our products and services. As a result, most of the expenditures we incur are included in our net sales and cost of sales according to U.S. Government agreement or regulation. As disclosed above, we may record changes in the amount of environmental remediation liabilities as a result of our quarterly reviews of the status of our environmental remediation sites, which would result in a change to the corresponding environmental asset and a charge to earnings. For example, if we were to determine that the liabilities should be increased by $100 million, the corresponding assets would be increased by approximately $87 million, with the remainder recorded as a charge to earnings. This allocation is determined annually, based upon our existing and projected business activities with the U.S. Government. We cannot reasonably determine the extent of our financial exposure at all environmental sites with which we are involved. There are a number of former operating facilities we are monitoring or investigating for potential future remediation. In some cases, although a loss may be probable, it is not possible at this time to reasonably estimate the amount of any obligation for remediation activities because of uncertainties ( e.g ., assessing the extent of the contamination). During any particular quarter, such uncertainties may be resolved to allow us to estimate and recognize the initial liability to remediate a particular former operating site. The amount of the liability could be material. Upon recognition of the liability, a portion will be recognized as an asset with the remainder charged to operations. If we are ultimately found to have liability at those sites where we have been designated a PRP, we expect that the actual costs of remediation will be shared with other liable PRPs. Generally, PRPs that are ultimately determined to be responsible parties are strictly liable for site cleanup and usually agree among themselves to share, on an allocated basis, the costs and expenses for investigation and remediation of hazardous materials. Under existing environmental laws, responsible parties are jointly and severally liable and, therefore, we are potentially liable for the full cost of funding such remediation. In the unlikely event that we were required to fund the entire cost of such remediation, the statutory framework provides that we may pursue rights of contribution from the other PRPs. The amounts we record do not reflect the fact that we may recover some of the environmental costs we have incurred through insurance or from other PRPs, which we are required to pursue by agreement and U.S. Government regulation. Goodwill Our goodwill at December 31, 2010 and 2009 amounted to $9.6 billion and $9.9 billion. We review goodwill for impairment on an annual basis and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. Such events or circumstances could include significant changes in the business climate of our industry, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or disposal of a portion of a reporting unit. The assessment is performed at the reporting unit level. Our annual testing date is October 1. Performing the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including how we define reporting units and determine their fair value. We consider a component of our business to be a reporting unit if it constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available and management regularly reviews the operating results of that component. We estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using a discounted cash flow methodology that requires significant judgment. Forecasts of future cash flows are based on our best estimate of future sales and operating costs, based primarily on existing firm orders, expected future orders, contracts with suppliers, labor agreements, and general market conditions. The discount rate applied to our forecasts of future cash flows is based on our estimated weighted average cost of capital. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and/or goodwill impairment for each reporting unit. We evaluate goodwill for impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value, we measure impairment by comparing the derived fair value of goodwill to its carrying value, and any impairment determined is recorded in the current period. 46 Table of Contents We completed our assessment of goodwill as of October 1, 2010 and determined that the estimated fair value of each reporting unit exceeded its corresponding carrying amount and, as such, no impairment existed at that date. Changes in estimates and assumptions we make in conducting our goodwill assessment could affect the estimated fair value of one or more of our reporting units and could result in a goodwill impairment charge in a future period. However, we currently do not believe that any of our reporting units are at risk of failing a goodwill impairment test in the near term, as their fair value is significantly greater than their carrying value. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In October 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued an accounting standard which revised its accounting guidance related to revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables. The standard relates to the determination of when the individual deliverables included in a multiple-element arrangement may be treated as separate units of accounting and modifies the manner in which the transaction consideration is allocated across the individual deliverables, thereby affecting the timing of revenue recognition. Also, the standard expands the disclosure requirements for revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables. The standard will be effective for us beginning on January 1, 2011, and will apply prospectively to certain multiple-element arrangements with non-U.S. Government customers entered into or materially modified after the adoption date. We do not expect the adoption of this accounting standard will have a material effect on our financial results. 
