CIK: 936468
Company Name: LOCKHEED MARTIN CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-02-26


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Financial Section Roadmap The financial section of our Annual Report includes management discussion and analysis, our consolidated financial statements, notes to those financial statements and a five-year summary of financial information. We have prepared the following summary, or roadmap, to assist in your review of the financial section. It is designed to give you an overview of our Company and focus your review by directing you to some of the more important activities and events that occurred this year. Our Business We principally research, design, develop, manufacture, integrate, operate and sustain advanced technology systems and products, and provide a broad range of management, engineering, technical, scientific, logistic and information services. We mainly serve customers in domestic and international defense, civil agencies, and homeland security. Our sales to agencies of the U.S. Government, including those to the Department of Defense (DoD), represented 84% of our sales in 2006. Of the remaining 16% of sales, approximately 13% related to sales to international customers (including foreign military sales funded, in whole or in part, by the U.S. Government), with the remainder attributable to commercial and other customers. In 2005 and 2004, sales to agencies of the U.S. Government represented 85% and 80% of our total sales, respectively. Our main areas of focus are in defense, space, intelligence, homeland security, and government information technology. We operate in five principal business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, Space Systems, Information Technology & Global Services (IT&GS), and Integrated Systems & Solutions (IS&S). The name of our IT&GS segment, formerly known as Information & Technology Services, was changed to better reflect the segment capabilities and service offerings following the growth experienced by our information technology and business process services businesses and through recent acquisitions. As a lead systems integrator, our products and services range from electronics and information systems, including integrated net-centric solutions, to missiles, aircraft and spacecraft. On February 22, 2007, we announced a realignment of our operations to enhance support for critical customer missions and increase our integration of resources. The realignment includes the combination of our IT&GS and IS&S business segments into a new business segment named Information Systems & Global Services (IS&GS). In addition, several smaller components of our businesses were realigned as discussed more fully under the caption Business Segments in Item 1. Business. These changes do not affect the historical results, discussion or presentation of our business segments as set forth in this Form 10-K. We will begin to report our financial results consistent with this new structure beginning with the first quarter of 2007. Financial Section Overview The financial section includes the following: Management discussion and analysis, or MD&A (pages 32 through 55) provides our management view about industry trends, risks and uncertainties relating to Lockheed Martin, accounting policies that we view as critical in light of our business, our results of operations, including discussions about the key performance drivers of each of our business segments, our financial position and cash flows, commitments and contingencies, important events or transactions that have occurred over the last three years, and forward-looking information, as appropriate. Reports related to the financial statements and internal control over financial reporting (pages 56 through 58) include the following: A report from management, indicating our responsibility for financial reporting, the financial statements, and the system of internal control over financial reporting and an assessment of the effectiveness of those controls; A report from Ernst & Young LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, which includes their opinions on management assessment of internal control over financial reporting and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting; and A report from Ernst & Young LLP which includes their opinion on the fair presentation of our financial statements based on their audits. Financial statements (pages 59 through 62) include our consolidated statements of earnings, cash flows and stockholders equity for each of the last three years, and our balance sheet as of the end of the last two years. Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Notes to the financial statements (pages 63 through 90) provide insight into and are an integral part of our financial statements. The notes contain explanations of our significant accounting policies, details about certain of the captions on the 32 Table of Contents financial statements, information about significant events or transactions that have occurred, discussions about legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies, and selected financial information relating to our business segments. The notes to the financial statements also are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Highlights The financial section of our Annual Report describes our ongoing operations, including discussions about particular lines of business or programs, our ability to finance our operating activities, and trends and uncertainties in our industry and how they might affect our future operations. We also discuss those items affecting our results that were not considered in senior management assessment of the operating performance of our business segments. We separately disclose these items to assist in your evaluation of our overall operating performance and financial condition of our consolidated company. We would like to draw your attention to the following items disclosed in this financial section and where you will find them: Topic Location(s) Critical accounting policies: Contract accounting/revenue recognition Page 37 and page 64 Postretirement benefit plans Page 38 and page 77 Environmental matters Page 40, page 64 and page 83 Discussion of business segments Page 43 and page 85 Liquidity and cash flows Page 49 and page 63 Capital structure and resources Page 50, page 60, page 62 and page 74 Legal proceedings, commitments and contingencies Page 52 and page 82 Stock-based compensation Page 42, page 66 and page 75 Industry Considerations Department of Defense Business The President budget proposal for fiscal years 2008-2012 focuses on achieving a balanced budget while addressing the nation most critical needs and prosecuting the global war on terrorism. The Administration priorities include a strong national defense, tax relief to support economic growth, enhanced energy security, affordable health care, and further education improvement. Approximately 60% of the budget is devoted to defense and other matters of national security. Customer requirements for defense and related advanced technology systems for 2007 and beyond will continue to be affected by the global war on terrorism through the continued need for military missions and reconstruction efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan and the related fiscal consequences of war. For fiscal year 2008, the President budget includes $481.4 billion for the Department of Defense (the DoD), reflecting the Administration commitment to continued modernization of our Armed Forces while prosecuting the war on terrorism. This amount, called the base budget, excludes any funding for ongoing military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan and the global war on terrorism. These costs, discussed below, are requested as emergency supplemental funding. The fiscal year 2008 DoD base budget is an increase of $45.9 billion, or 10.5% over the fiscal year 2007 base budget. The 2008 DoD base budget includes $101.7 billion for procurement of systems (Procurement) and $75.1 billion for research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E), known as the investment accounts. The current year budget represents a nearly 8% increase in the investment accounts over fiscal year 2007 levels. The Operations and Maintenance accounts, which contain the bulk of funding for training, logistics, services, and other sustainment activities, total approximately $164.7 billion for fiscal year 2008, an increase of $16.1 billion, or nearly 11%, over fiscal year 2007 levels. The balance of the budget, including amounts for military personnel and military construction, is funded at $139.9 billion, compared to the fiscal year 2007 level of $130.5 billion. Over the Fiscal Years 2008-2012 Future Years Defense Plan (FYDP), total DoD funding is expected to rise to $538.5 billion in 2012, or 23.7% higher than the fiscal year 2007 budget. Total funding for the DoD over the first four years covered by the fiscal year 2008 FYDP proposal is $2,047 billion, an increase of $100 billion from the corresponding four fiscal years in the fiscal year 2007 plan released one year ago. In addition to the base DoD budget, the 2008 budget proposal includes $285.1 billion in supplemental funding for those activities not funded in the base budget for fiscal years 2007, 2008, and 2009, bringing the grand total for DoD requested in the President February 5, 2007 budget proposal to $766.5 billion. As part of the supplemental amounts, the Administration is again requesting funding to defray costs for Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. For fiscal year 2007, the Administration is requesting $93.4 billion for DoD, in addition to the $70 billion already approved by Congress in the fiscal year 2007 DoD Appropriations Act. For fiscal year 2008, the Administration has included a request for $141.7 billion in supplemental, or bridge, funding for anticipated, but not yet fully defined, war-related costs that are 33 Table of Contents expected to be needed early in fiscal year 2008. In addition, the Administration has included an estimate of $50 billion in the fiscal year 2009 DoD budget projection for continuing costs of the Iraq and Afghanistan deployments. Spending for procurement of equipment and systems comprises about 24%, or $72.6 billion, of these requested supplemental funds for fiscal year 2007 and 2008, reflecting the Administration broadened definition of emergency funding related to the global war on terrorism. Supplemental funding enables the DoD to proceed on critical modernization and acquisition programs, versus using amounts available for those programs to pay for the Iraq and Afghanistan missions. While Congress has expressed concern about the size of supplemental budgets, it is unlikely that funding for ongoing operations will be significantly curtailed by Congress and, thus, we do not believe that operations in Iraq and Afghanistan will materially impact the investment accounts in the near term. We believe our broad mix of programs and capabilities continues to position us favorably to support the current and future needs of the DoD. Our strong positions in air-power projection, precision-strike capability, and air mobility aircraft are strongly supported in the 2008 DoD budget request. Two of our more significant programs are the F-22 Raptor air dominance fighter and the F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter. The President fiscal year 2008 budget request includes $4.6 billion for the F-22 program to continue production of the aircraft under a multiyear contract expected to be entered into this year, and $6.1 billion for the F-35 program, including procurement of 12 aircraft. In addition, funding of $420 million is proposed to support the last year of production under the C-130J multiyear contract, with 29 additional aircraft included in the supplemental funding requests. The Air Force budget also supports our contract to upgrade the C-5 strategic airlift aircraft. We are also represented in almost every aspect of land, sea, air and space-based missile defense, including the AEGIS weapon system program, the Medium Extended Air Defense System (MEADS), the Patriot Advanced Capability (PAC-3) missile program, the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system, and the Multiple Kill Vehicle (MKV) program. In the areas of space intelligence and information superiority, we have leadership positions on programs such as the TSAT Mission Operations System (TMOS), Mobile User Objective System (MUOS), the Advanced Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) system, and the Space-Based Infrared System-High (SBIRS-H), and in classified programs. We are broadly positioned across the DoD in the area of command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR), including the Air Operations Center Weapons System Integrator (AOC WSI), the Warfighter Information Network Tactical (WIN-T), the Combatant Commanders Integrated Command and Control System (CCIC2S), and the Global Communications Support System Air Force (GCSS-AF). We have expanded into adjacent military product lines utilizing our existing advanced technology products and services. Both the Littoral Combat Ship and the VH-71 U.S. Presidential Helicopter programs are supported in the budget request. We are a significant presence in information technology support and modernization for the DoD. We are continuing to pursue opportunities to expand our sustainment and logistical support activities to enhance the longevity of the systems procured by our customers and improve supply chain management, and we see opportunities to grow our business in outsourcing of service functions and business process management. Recent acquisitions, such as Savi Technology, Inc., Pacific Architects and Engineers, Inc. (PAE) and Aspen Systems Corporation, support our access to new business within the DoD and other agencies of the U.S. Government. Most of the aforementioned programs require funding over several annual government budget cycles. There is always an inherent risk that these and other DoD programs which are subject to annual appropriation by Congress could become potential targets for future reductions or elimination of funding to pay for other programs. Non-Department of Defense Business The war on terrorism has focused greater attention on the security of our homeland and the need for better communication and interoperability among law enforcement, civil government agencies, intelligence agencies, and our military services. Our experience in the defense arena, together with our core information technology expertise, has enabled us to provide products and services to a number of government agencies, including the Departments of Homeland Security, Justice, Commerce, Health and Human Services, Transportation and Energy, the U.S. Postal Service, the Social Security Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Library of Congress. Certain of our acquisition activities, such as the acquisition of PAE in 2006, have also given us access to new customers outside of the DoD, such as the Department of State. We have continued to expand our capabilities in critical intelligence, knowledge management and e-Government solutions for our customers, including the Social Security Administration and the EPA, as well for the DoD. We also provide program management, business strategy and consulting, complex systems development and maintenance, complete life-cycle 34 Table of Contents software support, information assurance and enterprise solutions. The expected growth in business process outsourcing has been enabled by rule changes for public/private competitions, enabling the selection in 2005 of Lockheed Martin to operate the Federal Aviation Administration Automated Flight Services Station Network. In addition, recent trends continue to indicate an increase in demand by federal and civil government agencies for upgrading and investing in new information technology systems and solutions. As a result, we continue to focus our resources in support of infrastructure modernization that allows for interoperability and communication across agencies. In addition, the continuing strong emphasis on homeland security may increase demand for our capabilities in areas such as air traffic management, ports, waterways and cargo security, biohazard detection systems for postal equipment, employee identification and credential verification systems, information systems security and other global security systems solutions. Although our lines of business addressing civil government needs are not dependent on defense budgets, they share many of the same risks as our defense businesses, particularly the requirement for approval in annual appropriations acts. Other risks are unique to particular programs. For example, although indemnification by the U.S. Government to cover potential claims or liabilities resulting from a failure of technologies developed and deployed may be available in some instances for our defense businesses, U.S. Government indemnification may not be available for homeland security purposes. In addition, there are some instances where the U.S. Government could provide indemnification under applicable law, but elects not to do so. While we maintain insurance for some business risks, it is not possible to obtain coverage to protect against all operational risks and liabilities. We generally seek, and in certain cases have obtained, limitation of such potential liabilities related to the sale and use of our homeland security products and services through qualification by the Department of Homeland Security under the SAFETY Act provisions of the Homeland Security Act of 2002. Where we are unable to secure indemnification or qualification under the SAFETY Act or choose not to do so, we may nevertheless elect to provide the product or service when we think the related risks are manageable. Space Business We provide products and services to NASA, mainly through our Space Systems and IT&GS business segments. In 2006, Space Systems was selected by NASA to design and build the agency next-generation human space flight crew transportation system known as Orion, with an initial contract value of approximately $4.0 billion. Orion is a key element of NASA Vision for Space Exploration, and is planned to succeed the Space Shuttle in transporting a new generation of human explorers to and from space. In the fiscal year 2008 NASA budget proposal, Orion is supported at a level of $950.8 million. We also have a 50% equity interest in United Space Alliance, LLC which provides ground processing and other operational services to the Space Shuttle program. As with the DoD and other government funded programs, our government space programs require annual funding, subject to specific Congressional approval in annual appropriations acts. We continued to receive new orders from the U.S. military in 2006 for satellites to support missile defense, battlefield communications and other defense initiatives. The environment for our commercial satellites business continues to be very competitive due mainly to low demand for new satellites as a result of excess capacity in the telecommunications industry. We are managing our commercial satellite business with an expectation of receiving fewer orders due to market constraints. For a discussion of the results of operations of our Space Systems segment, see the Discussion of Business Segments section. In December 2006, we completed the formation of United Launch Alliance, LLC (ULA), a joint venture with The Boeing Company (Boeing), which combines the production, engineering, test and launch operations associated with U.S. Government launches of our Atlas launch vehicles and Boeing Delta launch vehicles. Under the terms of the joint venture agreement, Atlas and Delta expendable launch vehicles will continue to be available as alternatives on individual launch missions. The joint venture is a limited liability company in which we and Boeing each own 50%. We contributed the assets of our Atlas launch vehicle business to ULA and ULA assumed the liabilities of that business, in exchange for our 50% ownership interest. We are accounting for our investment in ULA under the equity method of accounting. The formation of ULA did not have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations or financial position for 2006. In October 2006, we sold our ownership interests in Lockheed Khrunichev Energia International, Inc. (LKEI) and ILS International Launch Services, Inc. (ILS). LKEI is a joint venture we had with Russian government-owned space firms which has exclusive rights to market launches of commercial, non-Russian-origin space payloads on the Proton family of rockets. One of the joint venture partners, Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center (Khrunichev), is the manufacturer 35 Table of Contents of the Proton launch vehicle and provider of the related launch services. ILS was a joint venture between LKEI and us to market Atlas and Proton launch vehicles and services. In periods prior to the sale of these interests, we consolidated the results of operations of LKEI and ILS into our financial statements based on our controlling financial interest. Contracts for Proton launch services usually required substantial advances from the customer prior to launch which were included as a liability on our balance sheet in customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred. At December 31, 2005, those advances totaled $315 million. A sizeable percentage of the advances we received from customers for Proton launch services were sent to Khrunichev and included on our balance sheet in inventories for launches under contract. At December 31, 2005, those payments to Khrunichev totaled $190 million. If a contracted launch service was not provided, the related advance would have to be refunded to the customer by LKEI. In the event LKEI did not refund the advance, we would have been responsible for making the payment to certain customers. Under the sale agreement, we will continue to be responsible to refund advances to certain customers if launch services are not provided and ILS does not refund the advance. Due to this continuing involvement with those customers of ILS, many of the risks related to this business have not been transferred and we did not recognize this transaction as a divestiture for financial reporting purposes. We deferred recognition of a net gain of approximately $60 million that otherwise would have been recognized on the sale of our interests in LKEI and ILS, and have continued to include the related assets and liabilities on our balance sheet. Our ability to realize the deferred net gain is dependent upon Khrunichev providing the contracted launch services and, in the event the launch services are not provided, ILS ability to refund the advance. Through December 31, 2006, all Proton launch services through LKEI were provided according to contract terms. Other Business Considerations As a government contractor, we are subject to U.S. Government oversight. The government may ask about and investigate our business practices and audit our compliance with applicable rules and regulations. Depending on the results of those audits and investigations, the government could make claims against us. Under government procurement regulations and practices, an indictment of a government contractor could result in that contractor being fined and suspended from being able to bid on, or be awarded, new government contracts for a period of time. A conviction could result in debarment for a specific period of time. Similar government oversight exists in most other countries where we conduct business. Although we cannot predict the outcome of these types of investigations and inquiries with certainty, based on current facts, we do not believe that any of the claims, audits or investigations pending against us are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. We are exposed to risks associated with U.S. Government contracting, including technological uncertainties, dependence on fewer manufacturing suppliers and obsolescence, as well as Congressional appropriation and allotment of funds each year. Many of our programs involve the development and application of state-of-the-art technologies aimed at achieving challenging goals. As a result, setbacks, delays, cost growth and product failures can occur. We have entered into various joint venture, teaming and other business arrangements to help support our portfolio of products and services in many of our lines of business. Some of these business arrangements include foreign partners. The conduct of international business introduces other risks into our operations, including changing economic conditions, fluctuations in relative currency values, regulation by foreign countries and the potential for unanticipated cost increases resulting from the possible deterioration of political relations. The nature of our international business also makes us subject to the export control regulations of the U.S. Department of State and the Department of Commerce. If these regulations are violated, it could result in monetary penalties and denial of export privileges. We are currently unaware of any violations of export control regulations which are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our business or our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. Critical Accounting Policies Contract Accounting / Revenue Recognition Approximately 85% of our sales are derived from long-term contracts for design, development and production activities, with the remainder attributable to contracts to provide other services that are not associated with design, development or production activities. We consider the nature of these contracts and the types of products and services provided when we determine the proper accounting method for a particular contract. 36 Table of Contents Accounting for Design, Development and Production Contracts Generally, we record long-term, fixed-price design, development and production contracts on a percentage of completion basis using units-of-delivery as the basis to measure progress toward completing the contract and recognizing sales. For example, we use this method of revenue recognition on our C-130J tactical transport aircraft program and Multiple Launch Rocket System program. For certain other long-term, fixed-price development and production contracts that, along with other factors, require us to deliver minimal quantities over a longer period of time or to perform a substantial level of development effort in comparison to the total value of the contract, sales are recorded when we achieve performance milestones or using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress toward completion. Under the cost-to-cost method of accounting, we recognize sales based on the ratio of costs incurred to our estimate of total costs at completion. As examples, we use this methodology for our F-22 Raptor program and the AEGIS Weapon System program. In some instances, long-term production programs may require a significant level of development and/or a low level of initial production units in their early phases, but will ultimately require delivery of increased quantities in later, full rate production stages. In those cases, the revenue recognition methodology may change from the cost-to-cost method to the units-of-delivery method after considering, among other factors, program and production stability. As we incur costs under cost-reimbursement-type contracts, we record sales. Cost-reimbursement-type contracts include time and materials and other level-of-effort-type contracts. Examples of this type of revenue recognition include the F-35 Lightning II Joint Strike Fighter System Development and Demonstration (SDD) program and the THAAD missile defense program. Most of our long-term contracts are denominated in U.S. dollars, including contracts for sales of military products and services to foreign governments conducted through the U.S. Government ( i.e., foreign military sales). As a general rule, we recognize sales and profits earlier in a production cycle when we use the cost-to-cost and milestone methods of percentage of completion accounting than when we use the units-of-delivery method. In addition, our profits and margins may vary materially depending on the types of long-term contracts undertaken, the costs incurred in their performance, the achievement of other performance objectives, and the stage of performance at which the right to receive fees, particularly under incentive and award fee contracts, is finally determined. Incentives and award fees related to performance on design, development and production contracts, which are generally awarded at the discretion of the customer, as well as penalties related to contract performance, are considered in estimating sales and profit rates. Estimates of award fees are based on actual awards and anticipated performance. Incentive provisions which increase or decrease earnings based solely on a single significant event are generally not recognized until the event occurs. Such incentives and penalties are recorded when there is sufficient information for us to assess anticipated performance. Accounting for design, development and production contracts requires judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract revenues and costs, and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. Due to the size and nature of the work required to be performed on many of our contracts, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. Contract costs include material, labor and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs. We have to make assumptions regarding labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the availability of materials, the length of time to complete the contract (to estimate increases in wages and prices for materials), and the availability and timing of funding from our customer. For contract change orders, claims or similar items, we apply judgment in estimating the amounts and assessing the potential for realization. These amounts are only included in contract value when they can be reliably estimated and realization is considered probable. We have accounting policies in place to address these as well as other contractual and business arrangements to properly account for long-term contracts. Products and services provided under long-term design, development and production contracts represent approximately 85% of our sales for 2006. Therefore, the amounts we record in our financial statements using contract accounting methods and cost accounting standards are material. Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if we used different assumptions or if our underlying circumstances were to change. For example, if underlying assumptions were to change such that our estimated profit rate at completion for all design, development and production contracts was higher or lower by one percentage point, our net earnings would increase or decrease by approximately $215 million. When adjustments in estimated contract revenues or costs are required, any changes from prior estimates are included in earnings in the current period. 37 Table of Contents Accounting for Other Services Contracts Revenue under contracts for services other than those associated with design, development or production activities is generally recognized either as services are performed or when a contractually required event has occurred, depending on the contract. This methodology is mainly used by our Information Technology & Global Services segment. Services contracts primarily include operations and maintenance contracts, and outsourcing-type arrangements. Revenue under such contracts is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the period of contract performance, unless evidence suggests that the revenue is earned or the obligations are fulfilled in a different pattern. Costs incurred under these services contracts are expensed as incurred, except that initial set-up costs are capitalized and recognized ratably over the life of the agreement. Operating profit related to such services contracts may fluctuate from period to period, particularly in the earlier phases of the contract. Incentives and award fees related to performance on services contracts are recognized when they are fixed and determinable, generally at the date of award. Other Contract Accounting Considerations The majority of our sales are driven by pricing based on costs incurred to produce products or perform services under contracts with the U.S. Government. Cost-based pricing is determined under the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR). The FAR provides guidance on the types of costs that are allowable in establishing prices for goods and services under U.S. Government contracts. For example, costs such as those related to charitable contributions, advertising, interest expense, and public relations are unallowable, and therefore not recoverable through sales. In addition, we may enter into agreements with the U.S. Government that address the subjects of allowability and allocability of costs to contracts for specific matters. For example, most of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation related to discontinued operations and sites operated in prior years are allocated to our current operations as general and administrative costs under FAR provisions and supporting agreements reached with the U.S. Government. We closely monitor compliance with and the consistent application of our critical accounting policies related to contract accounting. Business segment personnel assess the status of contracts through periodic contract status and performance reviews. Also, regular and recurring evaluations of contract cost, scheduling and technical matters are performed by management personnel independent from the business segment performing work under the contract. Costs incurred and allocated to contracts with the U.S. Government are reviewed for compliance with regulatory standards by our personnel, and are subject to audit by the Defense Contract Audit Agency. For other information on accounting policies we have in place for recognizing sales and profits, see our discussion under Sales and earnings in Note 1 to the financial statements. Postretirement Benefit Plans Most of our employees are covered by defined benefit pension plans (pension plans), and we provide health care and life insurance benefits to eligible retirees. Our earnings may be negatively or positively impacted by the amount of expense or income we record for our employee benefit plans. This is particularly true with expense or income for pension plans because those calculations are sensitive to changes in several key economic assumptions and workforce demographics. Non-union represented employees hired after January 1, 2006 do not participate in our defined benefit pension plans, but are eligible to participate in a new defined contribution plan in addition to our other retirement savings plans. Those employees have the ability to participate in our retiree medical plans, but we do not subsidize the cost of their participation. We account for our pension plans using Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (FAS) 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions and FAS 158, Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans, an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106 and 132(R). FAS 158 was adopted as of December 31, 2006. FAS 87 requires that the amounts we record, including the expense or income for the plans, be computed using actuarial valuations. These valuations include many assumptions, including assumptions we make relating to financial market and other economic conditions. Changes in key economic indicators can result in changes in the assumptions we use. The key year-end assumptions used to estimate pension expense or income for the following calendar year are the discount rate, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and the rates of increase in future compensation levels. We use judgment in reassessing these assumptions each year because we have to consider current market conditions and, in the case of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, past investment experience, judgments about future market trends, changes in interest rates and equity market performance. We also have to consider factors like the timing and amounts of expected contributions to the plans and benefit payments to plan participants. An example of how changes in these assumptions can affect our financial statements occurred in 2006. The discount rate assumption is based on available yields on high-quality fixed income investments. After reviewing yields on high-quality 38 Table of Contents long-term bonds at the end of 2006, and how those yields might apply to our projected pension cash flows, we increased our discount rate assumption to 5.875% at December 31, 2006, compared to 5.625% used at the end of 2005. This change, together with other factors such as the effects of the actual return on plan assets over the past few years, resulted in our projecting that the amount of pension expense for 2007 will decrease by approximately 25% as compared to 2006 expense. At the end of 2006, prior to our adoption of FAS 158, we recorded a noncash after-tax adjustment in stockholders equity to reflect a minimum pension liability for many of our pension plans. We calculated the minimum pension liability on a plan-by-plan basis by comparing the accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) for each plan to the fair value of that plan assets. We recorded the amount by which the ABO exceeded the fair value of the plan assets, after adjusting for previously recorded accrued or prepaid pension cost for the plan, as a minimum pension liability, with a corresponding increase in an intangible asset, if appropriate, and a reduction to stockholders equity. In 2006, the minimum pension liability decreased from the balance recorded at December 31, 2005, primarily due to a higher than expected return on benefit plan assets in 2006 and the increase in the discount rate assumption, and therefore we recorded a noncash after-tax adjustment that increased stockholders equity by $1,186 million. FAS 158 required us to recognize on a plan-by-plan basis the funded status of our postretirement benefit plans, with a corresponding adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax, in stockholders equity. The funded status is measured as the difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the projected benefit obligation (PBO) of the plan. Upon its adoption, we recognized assets for all of our overfunded plans and liabilities for our underfunded plans on our balance sheet at December 31, 2006; recognized an adjustment to the ending balance of accumulated other comprehensive loss in stockholders equity, net of tax, for previously unrecognized net actuarial losses and prior service cost or credits; and eliminated the minimum pension liability balance and intangible assets related to our plans that had been recorded prior to its adoption. The previously unrecognized actuarial losses and prior service costs were netted against the plans funded status on our balance sheet in prior periods in accordance with FAS 87. At year-end, the noncash after-tax adjustment we recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss related to the adoption of FAS 158 reduced stockholders equity by $3,069 million. The net impact of the minimum liability recognized under FAS 87 and the adjustments recorded under FAS 158 was to reduce our stockholders equity by $1,883 million. U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS) are a major factor in determining our pension funding requirements and govern the extent to which our pension costs are allocable to and recoverable under contracts with the U.S. Government. Funded amounts are recovered over time through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore are recognized in our net sales. The total funding requirement for pension plans under CAS in 2006 was $663 million. This is also the CAS expense we recorded for the year and included in our segment results of operations. That amount was funded through discretionary prepayments we made to the plans in 2005. For 2007, we expect our funding requirements and expense under CAS to decrease. Also in 2007, funding in addition to the amount calculated under CAS will likely be required under Internal Revenue Code (IRC) rules. Any additional amounts computed under the IRC rules are considered to be prepayments under the CAS rules, and are recorded on our balance sheet and recovered in future periods. In 2006, 2005 and 2004, we made discretionary prepayments of $594 million, $980 million and $485 million, respectively, to the pension trust. Prepayments reduce the amount of future cash funding that will be required under the CAS and IRC rules and, as a result, we expect to have no required cash contributions to the pension plans in 2007. The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension expense calculated in accordance with FAS 87 and pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS. Since the CAS expense is recovered through the pricing of our products and services on U.S. Government contracts, and therefore recognized in a particular segment net sales, the results of operations of our segments only include pension expense as determined and funded in accordance with CAS rules. Accordingly, the FAS/CAS adjustment is an amount included in the reconciliation of total segment operating profit to consolidated operating profit under GAAP. See the discussion of Net Unallocated Corporate (Expense) Income under Discussion of Business Segments. In August 2006, the President signed into law new legislation related to pension plan funding in response to the public concern over the adequacy of such funding. The new law has the effect of accelerating the required amount of annual pension plan contributions under the Internal Revenue Code that most companies will be required to pay, effective in 2008. The legislation provides an exemption for us as well as other large U.S. defense contractors that delays the requirement to accelerate funding. The legislation also requires the CAS Board to modify its pension accounting rules by 2010 to better align the recovery of pension contributions on U.S. Government contracts with the new accelerated funding requirements. The new funding requirements for large U.S. defense contractors will be delayed until the earlier of 2011 or the year in which the changes to the CAS rules are effective. 39 Table of Contents Environmental Matters We are a party to various agreements, proceedings and potential proceedings for environmental cleanup issues, including matters at various sites where we have been designated a potentially responsible party (PRP) by the EPA or by a state agency. We record financial statement accruals for environmental matters in the period that it becomes probable that a liability has been incurred and the amounts can be reasonably estimated (see the discussion under Environmental Matters in Note 1 to the financial statements). Judgment is required when we develop assumptions and estimate costs expected to be incurred for environmental remediation activities due to difficulties in assessing the extent of environmental remediation to be performed, complex environmental regulations and remediation technologies, cost allowability issues, agreements between PRPs to share in the cost of remediation as discussed below and other factors. We enter into agreements ( e.g., administrative orders, consent decrees) which document the extent and timing of our environmental remediation obligation. We are also involved in remediation activities at environmental sites where formal agreements exist but do not quantify the extent and timing of our obligation. Environmental cleanup activities usually cover several years, which makes estimating the costs more judgmental due to, for example, changing remediation technologies. To determine the costs related to cleanup sites, we have to assess the extent of contamination, the appropriate technology to be used to accomplish the remediation and evolving regulatory environmental standards. We consider these factors in our estimates of the timing and amount of any future costs that may be required for remediation actions. In cases where a date to complete activities at a particular environmental site cannot be estimated by reference to agreements or otherwise, we project costs over an appropriate time frame not to exceed 20 years. Given the required level of judgment and estimation, it is likely that materially different amounts could be recorded if different assumptions were used or if circumstances were to change ( e.g., a change in environmental standards). If we are ultimately found to have liability at those sites where we have been designated a PRP, we expect that the actual costs of remediation will be shared with other liable PRPs. Generally, PRPs that are ultimately determined to be responsible parties are strictly liable for site cleanup and usually agree among themselves to share, on an allocated basis, the costs and expenses for investigation and remediation of hazardous materials. Under existing environmental laws, responsible parties are jointly and severally liable and, therefore, we are potentially liable for the full cost of funding such remediation. In the unlikely event that we were required to fund the entire cost of such remediation, the statutory framework provides that we may pursue rights of contribution from the other PRPs. The amounts we record do not reflect the fact that we may recover some of the environmental costs we have incurred through insurance or from other PRPs, which we are required to pursue by agreement and U.S. Government regulation. Under agreements reached with the U.S. Government, most of the amounts we spend for groundwater treatment and soil remediation are allocated to our operations as general and administrative costs. Under existing government regulations, these and other environmental expenditures relating to our U.S. Government business, after deducting any recoveries received from insurance or other PRPs, are allowable in establishing prices of our products and services. As a result, a substantial amount of the expenditures we incur are being included in our sales and cost of sales according to U.S. Government agreement or regulation. At the end of 2006, the total amount of liabilities recorded on our balance sheet for environmental matters was $475 million. About 63% of the liability relates to sites in Redlands, Burbank and Glendale, California, and in Great Neck, New York, mainly for remediation of soil and groundwater contamination. The remainder of the liability relates to other properties (including current operating facilities and certain facilities operated in prior years) for which our obligation is probable and the financial exposure can be estimated. We have recorded assets totaling $386 million at December 31, 2006 for the portion of environmental costs that are probable of future recovery in pricing of our products and services for U.S. Government businesses. The amount that is expected to be allocated to our commercial businesses has been expensed through cost of sales. Any recoveries we receive from other PRPs or insurance would reduce the allocated amounts included in our future U.S. Government sales and cost of sales. Acquisition and Divestiture Activities We continuously strive to strengthen our portfolio of products and services to meet the current and future needs of our customers. We accomplish this not only internally, through our independent research and development activities, but also through acquisitions. We selectively pursue the acquisition of businesses and investments that complement our current portfolio and allow access to new customers or technologies. We have made a number of such niche acquisitions of 40 Table of Contents businesses during the past several years. Over the last five years, we have paid $2.5 billion to complete 15 such acquisitions. Conversely, we may also explore the sale of businesses, investments and surplus real estate. If we were to decide to sell any such businesses or real estate, the resulting gains, if any, would be recorded when the transactions are consummated and losses, if any, would be recorded when the value of the related asset is determined to be impaired. Acquisitions In 2006 and 2005, we completed acquisitions of the following businesses. There were no significant acquisition activities in 2004. Year ended December 31, 2006 Pacific Architects and Engineers, Inc., a provider of services to support military readiness, peacekeeping missions, nation-building activities, and disaster relief services (included in our IT&GS segment); Savi Technology, Inc., a developer of active radio frequency identification solutions (included in our IS&S segment); Aspen Systems Corporation, an information management company that delivers a range of business process and technology solutions (included in our IT&GS segment); ISX Corporation, a provider of military decision systems and other information technology solutions (included in our Electronic Systems segment); and HMT Vehicles, a military vehicle design company (included in our Electronic Systems segment). Year ended December 31, 2005 The SYTEX Group, Inc., a provider of information technology solutions and technical support services (included in our IT&GS segment); STASYS Limited, a U.K.-based technology and consulting firm specializing in network communications and defense interoperability (included in our IS&S segment); INSYS Group Limited, a U.K.-based diversified supplier of military communications systems, weapons systems and advanced analysis services (included in our Electronic Systems segment); and Coherent Technologies, Inc., a supplier of high-performance, laser-based remote sensing systems (included in the Space Systems segment). The aggregate cash paid for the 2006 acquisitions, as well as for amounts paid in 2006 related to acquisitions completed in 2005, was $1.1 billion. Additional payments totaling approximately $106 million are required to be made over the next three years related to these acquisitions, with approximately one-half of that amount payable over the next 12 months. The aggregate cash paid for the 2005 acquisitions, as well as for amounts paid in 2005 related to acquisitions completed in prior periods, was $564 million. We accounted for these acquisitions under the purchase method of accounting, and therefore recorded purchase accounting adjustments by allocating the purchase price to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The acquisitions were not material to our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005. Divestitures During 2006, 2005 and 2004, we continued to execute the strategy to monetize certain of our equity investments and surplus real estate, as follows: In 2006, we sold the following: Our ownership interests in LKEI and ILS, as discussed in Space Business under Industry Considerations. The gain on the sale was deferred pending the provision of launch services for certain customers; 21 million shares of Inmarsat plc, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $127 million in other income and expenses, and increased net earnings by $83 million ($0.19 per share); The assets of Space Imaging, LLC, which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $23 million in other income and expenses, and increased net earnings by $15 million ($0.03 per share); and Certain surplus land in California and Florida, which resulted in an aggregate gain, net of state income taxes, of $51 million in other income and expenses, and increased net earnings by $33 million ($0.08 per share). In 2005, we sold the following: Our interest in NeuStar, Inc., which resulted a gain, net of state income taxes, of $30 million in other income and expenses, and increased net earnings by $19 million ($0.04 per share); 41 Table of Contents 16 million of our Inmarsat plc shares for $89 million. In addition, primarily as a result of a successful initial public offering by Inmarsat, we recognized a gain of $42 million which had previously been deferred. Together, these transactions resulted in gains, net of state income taxes, totaling $126 million in other income and expenses, and increased net earnings by $82 million ($0.18 per share); and Our 25% interest in Intelsat, Ltd., which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $47 million in other income and expenses, and increased net earnings by $31 million ($0.07 per share). In 2004, we sold our shares of New Skies Satellites, N.V. (New Skies) which resulted in a gain, net of state income taxes, of $91 million in other income and expenses, and an increase in net earnings of $59 million ($0.13 per share). Results of Operations Since our operating cycle is long-term and involves many types of development and production contracts with varying production delivery schedules, the results of operations of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of recorded net sales and profits, may not be indicative of future operating results. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context. All per share amounts cited in this discussion are presented on a per diluted share basis. Net Sales (In billions) The following discussion of net sales and operating results provides an overview of our operations by focusing on key elements set forth in our statement of earnings. The Discussion of Business Segments which follows, describes the contributions of each of our business segments to our consolidated sales and operating profit for 2006, 2005 and 2004. We follow an integrated approach for managing the performance of our business, and generally focus the discussion of our results of operations around major lines of business versus distinguishing between products and services. As mentioned previously, most of our services revenues are generated in our Information Technology & Global Services segment. For 2006, net sales were $39.6 billion, a 6% increase over 2005 sales. Sales for 2005 were $37.2 billion, an increase of 5% compared to 2004. Sales, as compared to the prior years, increased in all segments except for anticipated reductions at Aeronautics in both 2006 and 2005. The U.S. Government is our largest customer, accounting for about 84% of our sales for 2006, compared to 85% in 2005 and 80% in 2004. Other income and expense, net was $519 million for 2006 compared to $449 million in 2005. The increase was primarily due to an increase in interest income resulting from higher interest rates and amounts invested, and gains from the sale of land. Other income and expense, net increased $328 million from 2004 to 2005 due to an increase in investment income, gains from the sale of investments (primarily Intelsat and Inmarsat) and charges in 2004 for the early retirement of debt. Effective January 1, 2006, we adopted FAS 123(R), Share-Based Payments , and related rules, on a modified prospective basis (see Note 11). Under this method, we recognize compensation cost related to the estimated fair value of nonvested stock options and restricted stock granted in 2006 and prior years. Prior to January 1, 2006, we measured compensation cost for stock options using the intrinsic value method, but disclosed the pro forma effects on net earnings and earnings per share as if compensation cost had been recognized based upon the fair value-based method. During the year ended December 31, 2006, we recorded compensation cost related to stock options and restricted stock totaling $111 million which is included in the statement of earnings in cost of sales. The net impact to earnings was $70 million ($0.16 per share). Compensation cost related to restricted stock in prior periods was not material. As of December 31, 2006, we had $118 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested stock options, restricted stock units and restricted stock awards. That cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.7 years. 42 Table of Contents State income taxes are included in our operations as general and administrative costs and, under U.S. Government regulations, are allowable in establishing prices for the products and services we sell to the U.S. Government. Therefore, a substantial portion of state income taxes is included in our sales and cost of sales. As a result, the impact on our operating profit (earnings before interest and taxes) of certain transactions and other matters disclosed in this Form 10-K is disclosed net of state income taxes. Our operating profit for 2006 was $4.0 billion, an increase of 32% compared to 2005. Our operating profit for 2005 was $3.0 billion, an increase of 43% compared to 2004. Interest expense for 2006 was $361 million, $9 million lower than 2005. Interest expense for 2005 was $370 million, $55 million lower than in 2004. The decrease in interest expense in both years was primarily due to reductions in our debt outstanding. Our effective tax rates were 29.6% for 2006, 30.2% for 2005, and 23.9% for 2004. The effective rates for 2006 and 2005 were lower than the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to tax benefits related to extraterritorial income exclusion (ETI) and the tax deductions for U.S. manufacturing activities and dividends related to our employee stock ownership plan. In addition, the rate for 2006 included a tax benefit related to claims we filed with the Internal Revenue Service for additional ETI tax benefits for sales in previous years. This benefit decreased income tax expense by $62 million ($0.14 per share), and reduced our effective tax rate for 2006 by 1.7%. For 2004, our tax rate was reduced from the statutory rate by the tax benefits related to ETI and tax deductible dividends. In addition, the 2004 rate reflected a $144 million ($0.32 per share) reduction in our income tax expense primarily resulting from the closure of an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) examination, which reduced our effective rate by 8.6%. Net earnings increased as compared to the prior year for the fifth consecutive year. We reported net earnings of $2.5 billion ($5.80 per share) in 2006, compared to net earnings of $1.8 billion ($4.10 per share) in 2005 and net earnings of $1.3 billion ($2.83 per share) in 2004. Discussion of Business Segments We operate in five business segments: Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, Space Systems, Information Technology & Global Services (IT&GS) and Integrated Systems & Solutions (IS&S). Our Aeronautics business segment designs, develops and produces advanced military aircraft, air vehicles and related technologies, primarily for U.S. and allied country military services. Combat aircraft programs include the F-35, F-22 and F-16 aircraft. The F-35 Lightning II is currently in the System Development and Demonstration phase. The successful first flight of the Conventional Take-Off and Landing (CTOL)-variant aircraft took place in 2006. We have been producing the F-22 Raptor since 1997, and delivered 27 to the U.S. Air Force in 2006. We also received a contract for Production Lot 6 (24 aircraft) and advanced procurement funding for Production Lots 7, 8 and 9. A total of 67 F-16 Fighting Falcons were delivered in 2006. Sales at Aeronautics are expected to decline slightly in 2007, with a more substantial decline expected in 2008 primarily due to a projected reduction in F-16 revenue. In the area of Air Mobility, we produce the C-130J Super Hercules aircraft. We delivered 12 aircraft in 2006 to the U.S. military. A total of 186 have been ordered, with 147 of those delivered through 2006. In addition to aircraft production, the segment provides logistics support, sustainment, and upgrade modification and services for its aircraft. The Electronic Systems business segment has a broad portfolio of products and services. Many of their activities involve a combination of both development and production contracts with varying delivery schedules. This business segment has continued to expand its core competencies as a leading systems integrator, as demonstrated with its role as the prime contractor on the Littoral Combat Ship program, which launched its first ship in 2006, and the Presidential Helicopter program. The Space Systems business segment is a key supplier of space solutions, primarily to our U.S. Government customers. Growth will depend on our government satellite and missile defense businesses, as well as activities associated with the NASA Orion program. With the formation of ULA and the sale of our interests in LKEI and ILS, growth in the segment will be less dependent on launch vehicles. Launch services to our U.S. Government customers are expected to be provided by ULA. The IT&GS and IS&S business segments continue to focus their capabilities in providing information technology services to defense, intelligence and other government customers, including expanding those capabilities through our acquisition activities over the past two years. We expect continued strong growth in providing information technology solutions to government agencies. 43 Table of Contents In the following table of financial data, total operating profit of the business segments is reconciled to the corresponding consolidated amount. The reconciling item Net unallocated Corporate expense includes the FAS/CAS pension adjustment (see the discussion of Postretirement Benefit Plans under Critical Accounting Policies ), earnings and losses from equity investments, interest income, costs for stock-based compensation programs, the effects of items not considered part of management evaluation of segment operating performance, and Corporate costs not allocated to the operating segments, as well as other miscellaneous Corporate activities. This table shows net sales and operating profit of the business segments and reconciles to the consolidated total. (In millions) 2006 2005 2004 Net Sales Aeronautics $ 11,401 $ 11,672 $ 11,785 Electronic Systems 11,304 10,580 9,729 Space Systems 7,923 6,820 6,359 Information Technology & Global Services 4,605 4,010 3,802 Integrated Systems & Solutions 4,387 4,131 3,851 $ 39,620 $ 37,213 $ 35,526 Operating profit Aeronautics $ 1,170 $ 994 $ 899 Electronic Systems 1,297 1,113 969 Space Systems 746 609 489 Information Technology & Global Services 430 351 285 Integrated Systems & Solutions 405 365 334 Total business segments 4,048 3,432 2,976 Net unallocated Corporate expense (95 ) (446 ) (887 ) $ 3,953 $ 2,986 $ 2,089 The following segment discussions also include information relating to negotiated backlog for each segment. Total negotiated backlog was approximately $76 billion and $75 billion at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. This amount included both funded backlog (unfilled firm orders for which funding has been both authorized and appropriated by the customer Congress in the case of U.S. Government agencies) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding has not yet been appropriated). Negotiated backlog does not include unexercised options or task orders to be issued under indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity (IDIQ) contracts. Funded backlog was approximately $41 billion at December 31, 2006. The Aeronautics segment generally includes fewer programs that have much larger sales and operating results than programs included in the other segments. Therefore, due to the large number of comparatively smaller programs in the remaining segments, the discussions of the results of operations of these business segments generally focus on lines of business within the segments rather than on specific programs. The following tables of financial information and related discussions of the results of operations of our business segments are consistent with the presentation of segment information in Note 15 to the financial statements. Segment Operating Profit (In millions) 44 Table of Contents Aeronautics Aeronautics operating results included the following: (In millions) 2006 2005 2004 Net sales $ 11,401 $ 11,672 $ 11,785 Operating profit 1,170 994 899 Backlog at year-end 25,464 29,580 30,489 Net sales for Aeronautics decreased by 2% in 2006 compared to 2005. The anticipated decline in net sales was due to a decline in Air Mobility sales that was partially offset by an increase in Combat Aircraft sales. Air Mobility sales declined by $524 million primarily due to C-130J deliveries (12 in 2006 compared to 15 in 2005) and lower volume on the C-5 program. Combat Aircraft sales increased by $279 million mainly due to higher F-35 and F-22 volume, partially offset by reduced volume on F-16 programs. Net sales for Aeronautics decreased by 1% in 2005 compared to 2004. The decrease was mainly due to anticipated declines in Combat Aircraft, which were partially offset by growth in Air Mobility. Combat Aircraft sales decreased by $480 million for the year primarily due to declines in F-16 volume, which more than offset higher F-35 and F-22 volume. The sales growth in Air Mobility was due to additional C-130J deliveries (15 in 2005 compared to 13 in 2004) and higher volume on other Air Mobility programs. Operating profit for the segment increased by 18% in 2006 compared to 2005. Combat Aircraft operating profit increased by $111 million, mainly due to higher volume on the F-35 and F-22 programs, and improved performance on F-16 programs. The improvement for the year was also attributable in part to the fact that in 2005, operating profit included a reduction in earnings on the F-35 program. Air Mobility operating profit increased $73 million, mainly due to improved performance on C-130J sustainment activities in 2006. Operating profit for the segment increased by 11% in 2005 compared to 2004. The increase was due to higher Air Mobility operating profit that exceeded a decline in Combat Aircraft operating profit. Air Mobility operating profit increased $100 million mainly due to improved performance and increased deliveries on the C-130J program. Combat Aircraft operating profit declined due to decreased F-16 deliveries (69 in 2005 compared to 83 in 2004) and reduced earnings on the F-35 development program, which more than offset increased volume and improved performance on the F-22 program. Backlog decreased in 2006 as compared to 2005 primarily as a result of sales volume on the F-35 program. Electronic Systems Electronic Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2006 2005 2004 Net sales $ 11,304 $ 10,580 $ 9,729 Operating profit 1,297 1,113 969 Backlog at year-end 20,994 19,932 18,239 Net sales for Electronic Systems increased 7% in 2006 as compared to 2005. Higher volume in platform integration activities led to increased sales of $344 million at Platform, Training & Transportation Solutions (PT&TS). Maritime Systems & Sensors (MS2) sales increased $267 million primarily due to surface systems activities. Air defense programs contributed to increased sales of $118 million at Missiles & Fire Control (M&FC). Net sales for Electronic Systems increased 9% in 2005 as compared to 2004. Higher volume in tactical and surface systems programs contributed to increased sales of $495 million at MS2. PT&TS sales increased $310 million primarily due to platform integration activities. Air defense and fire control programs contributed to increased sales of $40 million at M&FC. Operating profit for the segment increased by 17% in 2006 compared to 2005. Operating profit increased by $75 million at MS2 mainly due to higher volume on surface systems and undersea programs. Higher volume on air defense programs contributed to a $56 million increase in operating profit at M&FC. PT&TS operating profit increased $54 million mainly due to improved performance on distribution technology activities. 45 Table of Contents Operating profit for the segment increased by 15% in 2005 compared to 2004. Operating profit increased by $80 million at M&FC mainly due to improved performance on fire control and air defense programs. Performance on surface systems programs contributed to an increase in operating profit of $50 million at MS2. PT&TS operating profit increased $10 million primarily due to improved performance on simulation and training programs. The increase in backlog during 2006 over 2005 resulted primarily from increased orders on certain platform integration programs in PT&TS. Space Systems Space Systems operating results included the following: (In millions) 2006 2005 2004 Net sales $ 7,923 $ 6,820 $ 6,359 Operating profit 746 609 489 Backlog at year-end 18,768 15,925 16,112 Net Sales for Space Systems increased by 16% in 2006 compared to 2005. During the year, sales growth in Satellites and Strategic & Defensive Missile Systems (S&DMS) offset declines in Space Transportation. The $1.1 billion growth in Satellites sales was mainly due to higher volume on both government and commercial satellite programs. There were five commercial satellite deliveries in 2006 compared to no deliveries in 2005. Higher volume in both fleet ballistic missile and missile defense programs accounted for the $114 million sales increase at S&DMS. In Space Transportation, sales declined $102 million primarily due to lower volume in government space transportation activities on the Titan and External Tank programs. Increased sales on the Atlas Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle Launch Capabilities (ELC) contract partially offset the lower government space transportation sales. Net sales for Space Systems increased by 7% in 2005 compared to 2004. During the year, sales growth in Satellites and S&DMS offset declines in Space Transportation. The $410 million increase in Satellites sales was due to higher volume on government satellite programs that more than offset declines in commercial satellite activities. There were no commercial satellite deliveries in 2005, compared to four in 2004. Increased sales of $235 million in S&DMS were attributable to the fleet ballistic missile and missile defense programs. The $180 million decrease in Space Transportation sales was mainly due to having three Atlas launches in 2005 compared to six in 2004. Operating profit for the segment increased 22% in 2006 compared to 2005. Operating profit increased in Satellites, Space Transportation and S&DMS. The $72 million growth in Satellites operating profit was primarily driven by the volume and performance on government satellite programs and commercial satellite deliveries. In Space Transportation, the $39 million growth in operating profit was attributable to improved performance on the Atlas program resulting from risk reduction activities, including the first quarter definitization of the ELC contract. In S&DMS, the $26 million increase in operating profit was due to higher volume and improved performance on both the fleet ballistic missile and missile defense programs. Operating profit for the segment increased 25% in 2005 compared to 2004. Operating profit increased in Space Transportation, S&DMS and Satellites. In Space Transportation, the $60 million increase in operating profit was primarily attributable to improved performance on the Atlas vehicle program. Satellites operating profit increased $35 million due to the higher volume and improved performance on government satellite programs, which more than offset the decreased operating profit due to the decline in commercial satellite deliveries. The $20 million increase in S&DMS was attributable to higher volume on fleet ballistic missile and missile defense programs. In December 2006, we completed a transaction with Boeing to form ULA, a joint venture which combines the production, engineering, test and launch operations associated with U.S. Government launches of our Atlas launch vehicles and Boeing Delta launch vehicles (see related discussion on our Space Business under Industry Considerations ). We are accounting for our investment in ULA under the equity method of accounting. As a result, our share of the net earnings or losses of ULA are included in other income and expenses, and we will no longer recognize sales related to launch vehicle services provided to the U.S. Government. In 2006, we recorded sales to the U.S. Government for Atlas launch services totaling approximately $600 million. We have retained the right to market commercial Atlas launch services. We contributed assets to ULA, and ULA assumed liabilities related to our Atlas business in exchange for our 50% ownership interest. The net book value of the assets contributed and liabilities assumed was approximately $200 million at 46 Table of Contents December 1, 2006, the date of closing. We accounted for the transfer at net book value, with no gain or loss recognized. If our proportionate share of ULA net assets exceeds the book value of our investment, we would recognize the difference ratably over the next 10 years in other income and expenses. We currently anticipate that our 50% ownership share of ULA net assets will exceed the book value of our investment in ULA, but that amount remains subject to adjustment based on the final working capital and value of other assets which we and Boeing contributed to ULA. In addition, under our agreement with Boeing, we could be required to make an additional cash contribution to ULA based on changes in the working capital of the business and other assets contributed. Any additional capital contribution would have the effect of increasing our investment and decreasing the difference between our investment and our share of ULA net assets. This would decrease the amount that we would amortize and recognize in other income and expenses in the future. We currently estimate that the amount by which our share of ULA net assets will exceed our investment will be between $200 million and $300 million. Both we and Boeing also have agreed to provide approximately $225 million in additional funding to ULA. As of December 31, 2006, we had provided $3 million of additional funding to ULA (see Note 14). The formation of ULA did not have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations or financial position for 2006. We sold our ownership interests in LKEI and ILS in October 2006 (see related discussion on our Space Business under Industry Considerations ). LKEI is a joint venture we had with Russian government-owned space firms which has exclusive rights to market launches of commercial, non-Russian-origin space payloads on the Proton family of rockets. In periods prior to the sale of these interests, we consolidated the results of operations of LKEI and ILS into our financial statements based on our controlling financial interest. In 2006, we recorded sales related to Proton launch services totaling approximately $110 million. The increase in backlog during 2006 as compared to 2005 was mainly due to order volume related to the Orion program and government satellite programs, partially offset by a $2.6 billion decrease in backlog resulting from the formation of ULA and the sale of our interests in LKEI and ILS. Information Technology & Global Services Information Technology & Global Services operating results included the following: (In millions) 2006 2005 2004 Net sales $ 4,605 $ 4,010 $ 3,802 Operating profit 430 351 285 Backlog at year-end 5,680 5,414 4,560 Net sales for IT&GS increased by 15% in 2006 as compared to 2005. The increase in sales was primarily attributable to higher volume of $642 million in Information Technology and Defense Services. The sales increases include the impact of organic growth as well as the purchase of Pacific Architects and Engineers in September 2006. Net sales for IT&GS increased by 5% in 2005 as compared to 2004. The increase in sales was primarily attributable to higher volumes of $460 million in Information Technology and Defense Services, which more than offset a sales decline of $250 million in NASA programs. Information Technology sales increase includes the impact of organic growth and the purchase of SYTEX in March 2005. Operating profit for the segment increased by 23% in 2006 as compared to 2005, and in 2005 as compared to 2004. The operating profit increase in both years was mainly due to higher volume and improved performance in Information Technology and Defense Services. The IT&GS backlog for 2006 compared to 2005 remained relatively unchanged. Integrated Systems & Solutions Integrated Systems & Solutions operating results included the following: (In millions) 2006 2005 2004 Net sales $ 4,387 $ 4,131 $ 3,851 Operating profit 405 365 334 Backlog at year-end 4,999 3,974 4,586 47 Table of Contents Net sales for IS&S increased by 6% in 2006 as compared to 2005 and by 7% in 2005 as compared to 2004. For both comparative periods, the sales increases were primarily attributable to a higher volume of intelligence, defense and information assurance activities. Operating profit for the segment increased 11% in 2006 as compared to 2005 and by 9% in 2005 as compared to 2004. The increases in operating profit for both comparative periods were primarily attributable to higher volume and performance improvements on the activities described above. The increase in backlog during 2006 compared to 2005 was due to order volume in intelligence, defense and information assurance activities. Unallocated Corporate (Expense) Income, Net The following table shows the components of net unallocated Corporate (expense) income. (In millions) 2006 2005 2004 FAS/CAS pension adjustment $ (275 ) $ (626 ) $ (595 ) Items not considered in segment operating performance 214 173 (215 ) Stock compensation expense (111 ) Other, net 77 7 (77 ) $ (95 ) $ (446 ) $ (887 ) The FAS/CAS pension adjustment represents the difference between pension costs calculated and funded in accordance with CAS and pension expense determined in accordance with FAS 87. That difference is not included in segment operating results and therefore is a reconciling item between operating profit from the business segments and consolidated operating profit. The CAS funding amount is allocated among the business segments and is included as an expense item in the segments cost of goods sold. A majority of the cost is also passed along to our customers through contract pricing, and is consequently included in the segments sales. The following table shows the CAS funding that is included as expense in the segments operating results, the related FAS expense, and the resulting FAS/CAS pension adjustment: (In millions) 2006 2005 2004 FAS 87 expense $ (938 ) $ (1,124 ) $ (884 ) Less: CAS expense and funding (663 ) (498 ) (289 ) FAS/CAS pension adjustment expense $ (275 ) $ (626 ) $ (595 ) FAS 87 expense decreased in 2006 primarily due to the change in the rate of future compensation increases as well as the growth in plan assets in 2006, including contributions we made to the pension trust. Certain items are excluded from segment results as part of senior management evaluation of segment operating performance consistent with the management approach promulgated by FAS 131, Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information . For example, gains and losses related to the disposition of businesses or investments managed by Corporate, as well as other Corporate activities such as charges recorded related to the early repayment of debt, are not considered by management in evaluating the operating performance of business segments. Therefore, for purposes of segment reporting, the following items were included in Unallocated Corporate (expense) income, net for 2006, 2005 and 2004: (In millions, except per share data) Operating Profit (Loss) Net Earnings (Loss) Earnings (Loss) Per Share Year ended December 31, 2006 Gain on sale of interest in Inmarsat $ 127 $ 83 $ 0.19 Gains on sale of surplus land 51 33 0.08 Earnings from expiration of AES transaction indemnification 29 19 0.04 Gain on sale of Space Imaging assets 23 15 0.03 Debt exchange expenses (16 ) (11 ) (0.03 ) Benefit from claims for ETI tax benefits 62 0.14 $ 214 $ 201 $ 0.45 48 Table of Contents (In millions, except per share data) Operating Profit (Loss) Net Earnings (Loss) Earnings (Loss) Per Share Year ended December 31, 2005 Gains related to Inmarsat transactions $ 126 $ 82 $ 0.18 Gain on sale of interest in Intelsat 47 31 0.07 Gain on sale of interest in NeuStar 30 19 0.04 Impairment charge related to a satellite (30 ) (19 ) (0.04 ) $ 173 $ 113 $ 0.25 Year ended December 31, 2004 Charge for Pit 9 litigation $ (180 ) $ (117 ) $ (0.26 ) Charge for early retirement of debt (154 ) (100 ) (0.22 ) Gain on sale of interest in New Skies 91 59 0.13 Gain on sale of COMSAT General business 28 4 0.01 Benefit from closure of an IRS examination 144 0.32 $ (215 ) $ (10 ) $ (0.02 ) We adopted FAS 123(R) Share-Based Payments on January 1, 2006 and recognized stock compensation expense of $111 million ($70 million after-tax or $0.16 per share) for year ended December 31, 2006. The increase in the Other, net component of unallocated Corporate (expense) income net of $70 million from 2005 to 2006 and $84 million from 2004 to 2005 was primarily due to higher interest income from higher interest rates and amounts invested. Liquidity and Cash Flows We have a balanced cash deployment and disciplined growth strategy to enhance shareholder value and position ourselves to take advantage of new business opportunities when they arise. Consistent with that strategy, we have invested in our business (e.g., capital expenditures, independent research and development), made selective acquisitions of businesses, repurchased shares, increased our dividends and opportunistically reduced and refinanced our debt. The following provides an overview of our execution of this strategy. Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities (In millions) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $589 million to $3.8 billion in 2006 as compared to 2005 after having increased by $270 million to $3.2 billion in 2005 as compared to 2004. In 2006, the increase was primarily attributable to an increase in net earnings of $704 million, and also to an increase in working capital improvements of $150 million compared to 2005. The remaining change in cash between the periods was due to income tax payments, postretirement benefit plan contributions, and the timing of various other operating activities. In 2005, the increase was primarily attributable to an increase in net earnings of $559 million as compared to 2004, which more than offset a $386 million reduction in working capital improvements between the years. The remaining increase in cash between those periods was due to income tax payments and the timing of various other operating activities. The focus on improving our cash management processes continues to contribute to the aggregate reduction in operating working capital accounts (receivables, 49 Table of Contents inventories, accounts payable, and customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred), including an aggregate reduction of $256 million in 2006 as compared to a reduction of $106 million in 2005. Although we will continue to focus on management of operating working capital accounts, we do not expect the rate of improvements we have experienced in prior periods to continue. Investing Activities Capital expenditures Capital expenditures for property, plant and equipment amounted to $893 million in 2006, $865 million in 2005 and $769 million in 2004. We expect our capital expenditures over the next three years to exceed 2006 expenditures consistent with the expected growth in our business and to support specific program requirements. Acquisitions, divestitures and other activities We have a process to selectively identify businesses for acquisition that meet our financial targets, help build a balanced portfolio and provide disciplined growth. We paid $1,122 million, including amounts related to acquisitions completed in prior years, for the acquisition of new businesses in 2006, compared with $564 million in 2005 and $91 million in 2004. During 2006, we received proceeds of $132 million from the sale of our remaining shares in Inmarsat, $24 million from the sale of assets of Space Imaging, LLC, and $24 million from the sale of Lockheed Martin Intersputnik. During 2005, we received proceeds of $935 million from the divestiture of non-core equity investments. The proceeds included $752 million from the sale of our investment in Intelsat, Ltd., $140 million from the sale of Inmarsat shares and the redemption of certain Inmarsat equity-related investments, and $33 million from the sale of our NeuStar investment. During 2004, we received $140 million from the sale our investment in New Skies Satellites, N.V. and $50 million related to the reduction of our investment in Inmarsat Group Holdings, Ltd. Financing Activities Issuance and repayment of long-term debt Cash provided from operations has been our principal source of funds to refinance and reduce our long-term debt. During 2006, we paid $353 million to complete an exchange of debt and $210 million related to scheduled debt repayments. In 2005, we used $133 million of cash for the early retirement and scheduled repayment of long-term debt. In 2004, we used $1.1 billion of cash for the early retirement and scheduled repayment of long-term debt. Of that amount, $951 million related to the early retirement of debt through tender offers for which we incurred $163 million of associated costs. Share repurchases and dividends We also used cash in each of the last three years for common share repurchase activity as follows: $2,104 million for 27.6 million common shares in 2006, all of which were settled during the year along with $11 million for 0.2 million shares purchased in 2005; $1,222 million for 19.7 million common shares in 2005, of which $1,211 million for 19.5 million of those common shares, as well as $99 million for 1.8 million common shares purchased in 2004, was settled during the year; and $772 million for 14.7 million common shares in 2004, of which $673 million for 12.9 million common shares was settled during the year. Our share repurchase program authorizes the repurchase of up to 108 million shares of our common stock from time-to-time at management discretion, including 20 million of additional shares our Board authorized for repurchase in 2006. As of December 31, 2006, we had repurchased a total of 73.7 million shares under the program, and there remained approximately 34.3 million shares that may be repurchased in the future. The payment of dividends on our common shares is one of the key components of our balanced cash deployment strategy. Shareholders were paid cash dividends of $538 million in 2006, $462 million in 2005 and $405 million in 2004. We have increased our quarterly dividend rate in each of the last three years. We paid quarterly dividends of $0.30 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2006 and $0.35 per share for the last quarter of 2006; $0.25 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2005 and $0.30 per share for the last quarter of 2005; and $0.22 per share during each of the first three quarters of 2004 and $0.25 per share for the last quarter of 2004. Capital Structure and Resources At December 31, 2006, we held cash and cash equivalents of approximately $1.9 billion and short-term investments of $381 million. Our long-term debt, net of unamortized discounts, amounted to $4.4 billion. Our long-term debt is mainly in the form of publicly issued notes and debentures. We have $1.0 billion of convertible debentures that have a floating interest rate based on LIBOR; however, at December 31, 2006, we had an agreement in place to swap variable interest rates on the debentures for a fixed interest rate. With this swap agreement, our entire long-term debt portfolio effectively bears interest at fixed rates. 50 Table of Contents In August 2006, we issued $1.1 billion of new 6.15% Notes due 2036 (the New Notes). The New Notes were issued in exchange for a portion of certain then outstanding debt securities (the Old Notes), and cash consideration of $343 million. Holders also received a cash payment representing accrued and unpaid interest on the Old Notes. We accounted for the transaction as an exchange of debt under EITF 96-19, Debtor Accounting for a Modification or Exchange of Debt Instruments . The cash consideration of $343 million is being amortized over the life of the New Notes as a discount, using the effective interest method, and recorded in interest expense. The New Notes are included on our balance sheet under the caption long-term debt, net and are presented net of the unamortized discount. The expenses associated with the exchange, net of state income tax benefits, totaled $16 million and reduced net earnings by $11 million ($0.03 per share). Our stockholders equity amounted to $6.9 billion at December 31, 2006, a decrease of $1.0 billion from December 31, 2005. The decrease was primarily due to the adoption of FAS 158, which required recognition of a $3.1 billion adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive loss to recognize the net unrecognized actuarial losses and prior service costs, as well as the elimination of the previously recorded minimum pension liability and intangible asset, to record the unfunded status of our postretirement benefit plans. That adjustment was partially offset by a $1.2 billion minimum liability adjustment recorded prior to the adoption of FAS 158, resulting in a net decrease of $1.9 billion. See the discussion of Postretirement Benefit Plans under Critical Accounting Policies and disclosure in Note 12 for additional information. Net earnings and stock plan activities more than offset the reduction in stockholders equity as a result of our share repurchases and the payment of dividends. Through our debt repayment activities, our long-term debt balance has declined $3.1 billion over the last five years from $7.5 billion at December 31, 2001. Our debt-to-total capitalization ratio was 39% at December 31, 2006, unchanged from 39% at December 31, 2005. Debt-to-Total Capital Ratio Return on invested capital (ROIC) improved by 470 basis points during 2006 to 19.2%. We define ROIC as net earnings plus after-tax interest expense divided by average invested capital (stockholders equity plus debt), after adjusting stockholder equity by adding back amounts related to postretirement benefit plans, including those for minimum pension liabilities and, for 2006, the adoption of FAS 158. We believe that reporting ROIC provides investors with greater visibility into how effectively Lockheed Martin uses the capital invested in its operations. We use ROIC to evaluate multi-year investment decisions and as a long-term performance measure. We also use ROIC as a factor in evaluating management performance under certain of our incentive compensation plans. ROIC is not a measure of financial performance under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, and may not be defined and calculated by other companies in the same manner. ROIC should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net earnings as an indicator of performance. See Consolidated Financial Data Five Year Summary on page 30 of this Form 10-K for additional information concerning how we calculate ROIC. 51 Table of Contents Return On Invested Capital Ratio At December 31, 2006, we had in place a $1.5 billion revolving credit facility which expires in July 2010. There were no borrowings outstanding under the facility at December 31, 2006. Borrowings under the credit facility would be unsecured and bear interest at rates based, at our option, on the Eurodollar rate or a bank Base Rate (as defined). Each bank obligation to make loans under the credit facility is subject to, among other things, our compliance with various representations, warranties and covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets, and a covenant not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio. We have agreements in place with banking institutions to provide for the issuance of commercial paper. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding at December 31, 2006. If we were to issue commercial paper, the borrowings would be supported by the $1.5 billion credit facility. We have an effective shelf registration statement on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission to provide for the issuance of up to $1 billion in debt securities. If we were to issue debt under this shelf registration, we would expect to use the net proceeds for general corporate purposes. These purposes may include repayment of debt, working capital needs, capital expenditures, acquisitions and any other general corporate purpose. We actively seek to finance our business in a manner that preserves financial flexibility while minimizing borrowing costs to the extent practicable. Our management continually reviews changes in financial, market and economic conditions to manage the types, amounts and maturities of our indebtedness. We may at times refinance existing indebtedness, vary our mix of variable-rate and fixed-rate debt, or seek alternative financing sources for our cash and operational needs. Cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash flow from operations and other available financing resources are expected to be sufficient to meet anticipated operating, capital expenditure and debt service requirements, as well as acquisition and other discretionary investment needs, projected over the next three years. Contractual Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements At December 31, 2006, we had contractual commitments to repay debt, make payments under operating leases, settle obligations related to agreements to purchase goods and services, and settle other long-term liabilities. Capital lease obligations were negligible. Payments due under these long-term obligations and commitments are as follows: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term debt (a) $ 4,784 $ 34 $ 347 $ 2 $ 4,401 Other long-term liabilities 1,651 276 388 194 793 Operating lease obligations 1,145 288 465 271 121 Purchase obligations: Operating activities 22,771 12,996 7,520 1,561 694 Capital expenditures 302 264 38 Total contractual cash obligations $ 30,653 $ 13,858 $ 8,758 $ 2,028 $ 6,009 (a) The total amount of long-term debt excludes unamortized discounts of $345 million (see Note 7). 52 Table of Contents Long-term debt includes scheduled principal payments only. Generally, our long-term debt obligations are subject to, along with other things, compliance with certain covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to encumber our assets. Amounts related to other long-term liabilities in the preceding table represent the contractual obligations for certain long-term liabilities recorded as of December 31, 2006. Such amounts mainly include expected payments under deferred compensation plans, non-qualified pension plans, environmental liabilities and business acquisition agreements. Obligations related to environmental liabilities represent our estimate of remediation payment obligations under government consent decrees and agreements, excluding amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Government in its capacity as a potentially responsible party. Purchase obligations related to operating activities include agreements and requirements contracts that give the supplier recourse to us for cancellation or nonperformance under the contract or contain terms that would subject us to liquidated damages. Such agreements and contracts may, for example, be related to direct materials, obligations to sub-contractors and outsourcing arrangements. Total purchase obligations in the preceding table include approximately $22 billion related to contractual commitments entered into as a result of contracts we have with our U.S. Government customers. However, the U.S. Government would generally be required to pay us for any costs we incur relative to these commitments if they were to terminate the related contracts for convenience pursuant to FAR. For example, if we had commitments to purchase goods and services that were entered into as a result of a specific contract we received from our U.S. Government customer and the customer terminated the contract for their convenience, any amounts we would be required to pay to settle the related commitments, as well as amounts previously incurred, would generally be reimbursed by the customer. This would also be true in cases where we perform sub-contract work for a prime contractor under a U.S. Government contract. The termination for convenience language may also be included in contracts with foreign, state and local governments. We also have contracts with customers that do not include termination for convenience provisions, including contracts with commercial customers. Purchase obligations in the preceding table for capital expenditures generally include amounts for facilities and equipment at various of our locations, related to customer contracts. We also may enter into industrial participation agreements, sometimes referred to as offset agreements, as a condition to obtaining orders for our products and services from certain customers in foreign countries. These agreements are designed to enhance the social and economic environment of the foreign country by requiring the contractor to promote investment in the country. Offset agreements may be satisfied through activities that do not require us to use cash, including transferring technology, providing manufacturing and other consulting support to in-country projects, and the purchase by third parties ( e.g., our vendors) of supplies from in-country vendors. These agreements may also be satisfied through our use of cash for such activities as purchasing supplies from in-country vendors, providing financial support for in-country projects, and building or leasing facilities for in-country operations. We do not commit to offset agreements until orders for our products or services are definitive. Offset programs generally extend over several years and may provide for penalties in the event we fail to perform in accordance with offset requirements. No such penalties have been incurred during the last five years. The amounts ultimately applied against our offset agreements are based on negotiations with the customer and generally require cash outlays that represent only a fraction of the original amount in the offset agreement. At December 31, 2006, we had outstanding offset agreements totaling $8.2 billion, primarily related to our Aeronautics segment, that extend through 2016. To the extent we have entered into purchase obligations at December 31, 2006 that also satisfy offset agreements, those amounts are included in the preceding table. With respect to the formation of ULA, both we and Boeing have committed to provide up to $25 million each as additional capital contributions and $200 million each in other financial support to ULA, as required. The non-capital funding will be made in the form of a revolving credit agreement between us and ULA or guarantees of ULA financing with third parties, in either case, to the extent necessary for ULA to meet its working capital needs. We have agreed to provide this support for at least five years, and would expect to fund our requirements with cash on hand. To satisfy our non-capital financial support commitment, we and Boeing put into place at closing a revolving credit agreement with ULA. At December 31, 2006, we had made $3 million in payments under our capital contribution commitment, and no amounts had been drawn on the revolving credit agreement. In addition, both we and Boeing have cross-indemnified ULA related to certain financial support arrangements (e.g., letters of credit, surety bonds or foreign exchange contracts provided by either party) and guarantees by us and Boeing of the performance and financial obligations of ULA under certain launch service contracts. We believe ULA will be able to fully perform its obligations and that it will not be necessary to fulfill the guarantees contemplated under the cross-indemnities. We have entered into standby letter of credit agreements and other arrangements with financial institutions and customers mainly relating to advances received from customers and/or the guarantee of future performance on some of our 53 Table of Contents contracts. In some cases, we may also guarantee the contractual performance of third parties. At December 31, 2006, we had outstanding letters of credit, surety bonds and guarantees, as follows: Commitment Expiration By Period (In millions) Total Commitment Less Than 1 Year (a) 1-3 Years (a) 3-5 Years After 5 Years Standby letters of credit $ 2,571 $ 2,421 $ 95 $ 49 $ 6 Surety bonds 502 204 298 Guarantees 21 21 Total commitments $ 3,094 $ 2,625 $ 414 $ 49 $ 6 (a) Approximately $2,260 million and $18 million of standby letters of credit in the Less Than 1 Year and 1-3 Year periods, respectively, and approximately $44 million of surety bonds in the Less Than 1 Year period, are expected to renew for additional periods until completion of the contractual obligation. Included in the table above is approximately $180 million representing letter of credit and surety bond amounts for which related obligations or liabilities are also recorded on the balance sheet, either as reductions of inventories, as customer advances and amounts in excess of costs incurred, or as other liabilities. Approximately $2.0 billion of the standby letters of credit in the table above were to secure advance payments received under an F-16 contract from an international customer. These letters of credit are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance, and the amount available will be reduced as certain events occur throughout the period of performance in accordance with the contract terms. Similar to the letters of credit for the F-16 contract, other letters of credit and surety bonds are available for draw down in the event of our nonperformance. Under the agreement to sell our ownership interests in LKEI and ILS (see related discussion on our Space Business under Industry Considerations ), we will continue to be responsible to refund customer advances to certain customers if launch services are not provided and ILS does not refund the advance. We expect to recognize the $60 million deferred net gain on the transaction when our responsibility to refund the advances expires, which we generally believe will be in 2008 based on the expected Proton launch schedule, which is subject to change. Our ability to realize the deferred net gain is dependent upon Khrunichev providing the contracted launch services or, in the event the launch services are not provided, ILS ability to refund the advance. The amount we could be required to pay is expected to increase over time due to the payment of additional advances by the customers to ILS related to the specific launches we have guaranteed, and will be reduced by the occurrence of those launches. At December 31, 2006, the total amount that could be payable under the guarantees, approximating the total contract value of the guaranteed launches, was $344 million. That amount may be partially mitigated by approximately $70 million of cash we retained that, absent any requirements to make payments under the guarantees, will be paid to the buyer over time as the launches occur. Our balance sheet at December 31, 2006 included current and noncurrent assets relating to LKEI and ILS totaling $265 million, and current and noncurrent liabilities totaling $335 million, both of which will be reduced as the launch services are provided. The assets relate primarily to advances we have made to Khrunichev for future launches, and the liabilities relate primarily to advances we have received from customers for future launches. Any potential earnings impact resulting from our inability to realize the assets we have recorded related to LKEI and ILS would be partially mitigated by our not recognizing the deferred gain on the transaction. Through December 31, 2006, Proton launch services provided through ILS were provided according to contract terms. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure of Market Risk Our main exposure to market risk relates to interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. Our financial instruments that are subject to interest rate risk principally include fixed-rate and floating-rate long-term debt. At December 31, 2006, we had an agreement in place to swap variable interest rates on our $1.0 billion of convertible debentures based on LIBOR for a fixed interest rate through August 15, 2008. With this swap agreement, our long-term debt portfolio effectively bears interest at fixed rates. We have designated the agreement as a cash flow hedge of the forecasted LIBOR-based variable interest payments. Based on our evaluation at the inception of the hedging agreement and in subsequent periods, we expect the hedging relationship to be highly effective in achieving the offsetting cash flows attributable to the hedged variable interest payments, resulting in a fixed net interest expense reported on the statement of earnings. We determined that the hedging relationship remained effective at December 31, 2006. The fair value of the interest rate swap agreement is adjusted at each balance sheet date, with a corresponding adjustment to other comprehensive income. At December 31, 2006, the fair value of the interest rate swap agreement was not material. We use forward foreign exchange contracts to manage our exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, and generally do so in ways that qualify for hedge accounting treatment. These exchange contracts hedge the fluctuations in 54 Table of Contents cash flows associated with firm commitments or specific anticipated transactions contracted in foreign currencies, or hedge the exposure to rate changes affecting foreign currency denominated assets or liabilities. Related gains and losses on these contracts, to the extent they are effective hedges, are recognized in income at the same time the hedged transaction is recognized or when the hedged asset or liability is adjusted. To the extent the hedges are ineffective, gains and losses on the contracts are recognized in the current period. At December 31, 2006, the fair value of forward exchange contracts outstanding, as well as the amounts of gains and losses recorded during the year then ended, were not material. We evaluate the credit quality of potential counterparties to derivative transactions and only enter into agreements with those deemed to have minimal credit risk. We periodically monitor changes to counterparty credit quality as well as our concentration of credit exposure to individual counterparties. We do not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes. Accounting Pronouncements Pending Adoption In July 2006, the FASB issued Interpretation No. (FIN) 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes , which is effective January 1, 2007. The purpose of FIN 48 is to clarify and set forth consistent rules for accounting for uncertain income tax positions in accordance with FAS 109, Accounting for Income Taxes . The cumulative effect of applying the provisions of this interpretation, which is required to be reported separately as a noncash adjustment to the opening balance of our retained earnings in 2007, is currently not expected to have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows. Controls and Procedures We maintain disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our periodic filings with the SEC is reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules and forms, and to provide reasonable assurance that assets are safeguarded and transactions are properly executed and recorded. Our disclosure controls and procedures are also designed to ensure that information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO), as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. In designing and evaluating such controls and procedures, we recognize that any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives, and management necessarily is required to use its judgment in evaluating the cost-benefit relationship of possible controls and procedures. Also, we have investments in certain unconsolidated entities. As we do not control or manage these entities, our controls and procedures with respect to those entities are necessarily substantially more limited than those we maintain with respect to our consolidated subsidiaries. We routinely review our system of internal control over financial reporting and make changes to our processes and systems to improve controls and increase efficiency, while ensuring that we maintain an effective internal control environment. Changes may include such activities as implementing new, more efficient systems, consolidating the activities of two or more business units, and migrating certain processes to our Shared Services centers. In addition, when we acquire new businesses, we review the controls and procedures of the acquired business as part of our integration activities. We performed an evaluation of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures, including internal control over financial reporting, as of December 31, 2006. The evaluation was performed with the participation of senior management of each business segment and key Corporate functions, and under the supervision of the CEO and CFO. Based on our evaluation, we concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of December 31, 2006. During 2006, we also performed a separate evaluation of our internal control over financial reporting in accordance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, including performing self-assessment and monitoring procedures. Based on those activities and other evaluation procedures, our management, including the CEO and CFO, concluded that internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2006. Management report on our financial statements and internal control over financial reporting appears on page 56. In addition, both our assessment and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting were audited by our independent registered public accounting firm. Their report appears on page 57. There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the most recently completed fiscal quarter that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 
